SCENE I


 The palace of the  KING OF BURMAH.   The scene is laid in the Hall of a
Hundred Doors .   In the distance can be seen the moat ,  the waiting
elephants ,  and the peacocks promenading proudly in the blinding
sunshine of late afternoon .   The scene discovers  KING MENG BENG
 seated on a raised cushion sewn with rubies ,  under a canopy supported
by four attendants ,  motionless as bronze figures .   By his side is a
betel-nut box ,  glittering with gems .   On either side of him ,  but
much lower down ,  are the  TWO AMBASSADORS OF THE KING OF CEYLON,
 bearers of the King of Ceylon's consent to the marriage of his only
daughter to Meng Beng in two years' time ,  men of grave ,  majestic
mien ,  clad in flowing robes almost monastic in their white simplicity .
 They smoke gravely at the invitation of  MENG BENG.

 Round about are grouped the courtiers ,  the poonygees ,  and the
kneeling servants ,  while in the background wait the dancing girls .
 Banners ,  propelled with a measured rhythm ,  create an agreeable
breeze .   On a great table of gold stand goblets of gold and heaped-up
fruits .   Everywhere will be observed the emblems of the Royal Peacock
and the Sacred White Elephant .   Burmese musical instruments sound an
abrupt but charming discord .   The poinsettias flower punctuates points
of deepest colour from out of vases fashioned like the lotus .   Orchids
are everywhere .   The indescribable scent of Burmah steals across the
footlights .   The glow ,  the colour ,  the sun-swept vista sweeps
across the senses .  THE KING  claps his hands .   The  DANCING GIRLS,
 at the signal ,  advance .   They are clad in dresses made of fish
scales ,  which are fastened with diamonds and pale emeralds ,  to
imitate the upthrown spray on the crest of a wave .   The dance
concluded ,  the  CINGALESE AMBASSADORS  rise and prepare to take
ceremonious leave of  THE KING,  who hands to them ,  through his 
VIZIER,  his message to His Majesty of Ceylon ,  inscribed on palm leaves
and enclosed in a bejewelled casket .

 Many flowery speeches pass .   Exit  ( L. ),  walking backwards .

THE KING  expresses a desire for rest before starting by the Moon of
Taboung  {4}  for the Pagoda of Golden Flowers .

 Exit  MENG BENG ( C. ),  an alcove of satin hangings which commands a
view of the great hall .

 The Crowd break up into groups .  U. RAI GYAN THOO  and  MOUNG PHO MHIN
 converse on the tendency of the King to interference in affairs of
State ;  his extreme youth and delicacy of temperament ;  the pity that
the marriage is to be so long delayed ;  the necessity to find him some
distraction in the meantime .

 Suddenly the tom-toms sound loudly .   There is much movement .   The
moon rises over the sea .   Torches flare as the attendants move to and
fro in the gardens beyond .

 The White Elephant of the King ,  with its trappings of gold ,  is led
to the entrance where ,  at a word ,  it sinks obediently to the ground .

THE KING  appears .   He has changed his gay apple-green dress to one of
more sombre hue .   He enters the howdah -- the elephant rises -- the
procession starts .   It consists of not fewer than two hundred persons ,
 keeping in view of the audience until lost by a bend in the avenue .



SCENE II


THE PAGODA OF GOLDEN FLOWERS

Midnight

 Surrounded by Peepul-trees ,  the great Htee , {6}  with its crown of a
myriad jewels ,  rises towards the violet ,  star-studded sky ,  its
golden bells tinkling in a soft night-wind .

 When the curtain rises ,  the circular platform is deserted .   Statues
of Buddha seated and recumbent fill the numberless niches in the wall ,
 and before each burn long candles ;  heaped-up pink roses and japonica
on brass trays are lit from above by swinging coloured lamps .   At
intervals are stalls laden with fruit and cheroots .   All is
mysterious ,  solemn ,  beautiful .

 A deep Burmese gong tolls .   People emerge from the four staircases
that lead up to the platform .   Men ,  women ,  and children ,  all in
gala attire .   The young people conversing ,  gesticulating ,  smiling .
 The older people ,  more subdued ,  carry beads and votive offering to
Buddha .   Charming Burmese girls ,  with huge cigars ,  meet and greet
handsome Burmese men smoking cheroots and wearing flowers in their ears .
 Children play silently with coloured balls .   In the corners ,  under
canopies ,  are seated fortune-tellers ,  busy casting horoscopes .   It
is a veritable riot of colour ,  with never a discordant note .

 Through the crowd  THE KING  passes alone and unrecognised ,  and
disappears through double doors of heavily carved teak wood .   He has
hardly passed when  MAH PHRU,  a very lovely girl ,  enters in distress .
 She whispers that she desires an audience of the King who has come
amongst them .   The few who hear her shrug their shoulders ,  smile ,
 and pass on .   They are incredulous .   She goes from group to group ,
 but the people turn from her with disdain .   Then the great doors
open ,  and  THE KING  is seen .   The girl throws herself ,  Oriental
fashion ,  in his path .   Her beauty and her pathos arrest his attention
and he waves aside those who would interfere .   She implores  THE KING'S
 protection .   She is willing to be his slave .   He listens with deep
attention .   She explains that since her father's death she has been
continuously persecuted by the village people on the double count of her
Italian blood and her poverty .

 The girl invites him to come to her hut in the forest and verify what
she says .   With a gesture he signifies that he will follow where she
leads .   She rises .   The crowd gathers round -- all are hushed to
silence .  THE KING,  as one entranced ,  puts aside all who would in any
way interfere .   The girl precedes him ,  going from the Pagoda towards
the night .   When she reaches the great staircase ,  she beckons ,
 Oriental fashion ,  with downward hand .   The scene should ,  in
grouping and colour ,  make for rare beauty .



SCENE III


 A humble dhunni-thatched hut ,  set amidst the whispering grandeur of
the jungle ,  with its mighty trees ,  its trackless paths ,  its
indescribable silence .   The curtain discovers  MAH PHRU  and  THE KING,
 who expresses his amazement at the loneliness and the poverty of her
lot .   She explains that poverty is not what frightens her ,  but the
enmity of those who live yonder ,  and who make it almost impossible for
her to sell her cucumbers or her pineapples .  THE KING'S  gaze never
leaves the face or figure of the girl .   He declares that he will
protect her -- that he will build her a home here in the shadow of the
loneliness around them .   He has two years of an unfettered
freedom -- for those years he can command his life .   He loves her ,  he
desires her -- they will find a Paradise together .   The girl trembles
with joy -- with fear -- with surprise .  "And after two years?"  she
asks .  "Death,"  he answers .




ACT II


SCENE I


 The jungle once more .   Time :  noonday .   In place of the hut is a
building ,  half Burmese ,  half Italian villa ,  of white Chunam ,  with
curled roofs rising on roofs ,  gilded and adorned with spiral carvings
and a myriad golden and jewel-encrusted bells .   On the broad verandahs
are thrown Eastern carpets ,  rugs ,  embroideries .

 The world is sun-soaked .   The surrounding trees stand sentinel-like in
the burning light .   Burmese servants squat motionless ,  smoking on the
broad white steps that lead from the house to the garden .   The crows
croak drowsily at intervals .   Parrots scream intermittently .   The
sound of a guitar playing a Venetian love-song can be heard coming from
the interior .   Otherwise life apparently sleeps .   Two elderly
retainers break the silence .

"When will the Thakin tire of this?"  one asks the other in kindly
contempt .

"The end is already at hand.  I read it at dawn to-day."

"Whence will it come?"

"I know not.  It is written that one heart will break."

"He will leave her?"

"He will leave her.  He will have no choice--who can war with Fate?"

 The sun shifts a little ;  a light breeze kisses the motionless palm
leaves -- they quiver gracefully .   Attendants appear R. and L. bearing
a great Shamiana  ( tent ),  silver poles ,  carved chairs ,  foot
supports ,  fruit ,  flowers ,  embroidered fans .   Three musicians in
semi-Venetian-Burmese costume follow with their instruments .   The tent
erected ,  enter  (C.) MENG BENG  and  MAH PHRU,  followed by two Burmese
women carrying two tiny children in Burmese fashion on their hips .

 The servants retire to a distance .  MENG BENG  and  MAH PHRU  seat
themselves on carven chairs ;  the children are placed at their feet and
given coloured glass balls to play with .  MENG BENG  and  MAH PHRU  gaze
at them with deep affection and then at each other .

 The musicians play light ,  zephyr-like airs .  MENG BENG  and  MAH PHRU
 talk together .  MENG BENG  smokes a cigar , MAH PHRU  has one of the
big yellow cheroots affected by Burmese women to-day .

"It wants but two days to the two years,"  he tells her sadly .

"And you are happy?"

"As a god."

 She smiles radiantly .   She suspects nothing .   She is more beautiful
than before .   Her dress is of the richest Mandalay silks .   She wears
big nadoungs of rubies in her ears .

 Presently  MENG BENG  arranges a set of ivory chessmen on a low table
between them .   The sun sinks slowly .   The sound of approaching wheels
is heard .

 Enter  ( C. ) U. RAI GYAN THOO,  preceded by two servants .  MENG BENG
 looks up in surprise -- in alarm .   He rises ,  etc. ,  and goes
forward .  U. RAI GYAN THOO  presents a letter written on palm leaves .
MENG BENG  does not open it .

 The curtains at the opening of the tent are ,  Oriental fashion ,
 dropped .   The music ceases .

MENG BENG  and the  GRAND VIZIER  converse apart .   The Minister
explains that the Princess of Ceylon's ship and its great convoy have
already been sighted .   The Court and city wait in eager expectancy .
 The King has worshipped long enough at the Pagoda of Golden
Flowers -- his subjects and his bride call to him .  U. RAI GYAN THOO
 has come to take him to them .

MENG BENG  is terribly distressed .

"You can return one day,"  the Vizier tells him .  "The Pagoda will
remain.  I also, once, in years long dead, Lord of the Sea and Moon,
worshipped at a Pagoda."

MENG BENG  seeks  MAH PHRU  to explain that he goes on urgent affairs ,
 that he will come back to her and to his sons ,  perhaps before the
waning of the new moon .   Their parting is sad with the pensive sadness
of look and gesture peculiar to Eastern people .

MENG BENG  goes  (C.)  with  U. RAI GYAN THOO.  MAH PHRU  mounts to the
verandah to watch them go from behind the curtains .   Then ,  slowly
sinking across the heaped-up cushions ,  she faints .

 The sun has set .   The music ceases .   The melancholy cry of the
peacocks fills the silence .

ACT DROP




ACT III


SCENE I


 Seven years have elapsed .

 The same scene .

 Curtain discovers  MAH PHRU  seated on a high verandah .   A clearance
has been made in the surrounding trees to give a full view of the road
beyond .   She is watching ,  always watching .   With her are two
beautiful little boys .

"To-day, perhaps,"  she murmurs .  "Perhaps to-morrow; but without
fail--one day."

"Look!"  she cries .  "At last my lord returns!"

 Coming up the jungle road ,  in view of the audience ,  are a bevy of
horsemen .

MAH PHRU,  wondering ,  descends to greet them .   Enter  U. RAI GYAN
THOO.   He is dressed all in white ,  which is Burmese mourning .  MAH
PHRU  sinks back -- she fears the worst .   The old man reassures her .
 He tells her that  MENG BENG  has sent for his sons -- that the Queen is
dead ,  and there is no heir .

"Queen?  What Queen?"  demands  MAH PHRU.

"The Queen of Burmah."

 So  MAH PHRU  learns for the first time that her lover is the ruler of
the country ,  supreme master of and dictator to everyone .

 Weeping ,  but not daring to disobey ,  she summons the children to
her ;  then ,  sinking on her knees ,  entreats in moving and pathetic
words to be permitted to go with them ,  in the lowest most menial
capacity .  U. RAI GYAN THOO  refuses .   There is no place for her in
the greatness of the world yonder .  "Even Kings forget,"  he says .  "It
is the command of the supreme Lord of the Earth and of the Sky that she
remain where she is."

 Then he orders his followers to make the necessary arrangements for the
safe journey of their future king and his brother .

 The children stand passive in their gay dress ,  but are bewildered and
afraid .

MAH PHRU  has risen to her feet .   She appears as if turned to
bronze -- a model of restraint and dignity ,  blent with colour and
beauty and infinite grace .

THE CURTAIN DESCENDS SLOWLY



SCENE II


 The same night .

 The home of the Chinese Wizard , HIP LOONG,  by the river -- a place
fitted with Chinese things :  Dragons of gold with eyes of jade gleaming
from out dim corners ,  Buddhas of gigantic size fashioned of priceless
metals with heads that move ,  swinging banners with fringes of
many-coloured stones ,  lanterns with glass slides on which are painted
grotesque figures .   The air is full of the scent of joss sticks .   The
Wizard reclines on a divan ,  inhaling opium slowly ,  clothed with the
subdued gorgeousness of China -- blue and tomato-red predominate .   He
has the appearance of a wrinkled walnut .   His forehead is a lattice-
work of wrinkles .   His pigtail ,  braided with red ,  is twisted round
his head .   His hands are as claws .   The effect is weird ,
 unearthly .

 Enter  MAH PHRU.

 The Wizard silently motions her to some piled-up cushions at a little
distance .   He listens to what she tells him .   He appears unmoved ,
 at a recital apparently full of tragedy .   Only the eyes of the dragons
move ,  and the heads of the Buddhas go slowly like pendulums .   When
she has finished speaking , HIP LOONG  makes reply .

"This is how passion always ends.  I have lived for a thousand years; and
on this planet it is ever the same."

MAH PHRU  is not listening .

"How can I go to my children?"  she demands ,  once again .

"I can turn you into a bird,"  the Wizard says .  "You can fly to the
palace and walk and watch ever on that terrace in the rose gardens above
the sea."

"What bird?"  she asks ,  trembling .

"You shall have the form of the white paddy bird, because, though a woman
and foolish as women ever are, you are very pure ivory.  O! daughter of
man and of love."

 To this  MAH PHRU  dissents .   She paces the long room .

"Transform me into a peacock; they are more beautiful."

 The Wizard ,  leaning on his elbow ,  smiles ,  and the smile is a
revelation of a mocking comprehension .

"So be it."   He bows his head .

 The lights fade one by one .

CURTAIN



SCENE III


 The Gardens of the Palace of the King .

 Time :  late afternoon .

 Colonnades of roses stretch away on every side .   Fountains play ,
 throwing a shower on water-lilies of monstrous size .   Peacocks walk
with stately tread across the green turf .   Only one ,  larger and more
beautiful than the rest ,  is perched alone ,  with drooping head and
folded tail ,  on the broad-pillared terrace that overhangs the sea .
 The scene is aglow with light and colour ,  yet holds a shadowed
silence .

 Enter some courtiers ,  who converse in perturbed fashion as they go
towards the Palace .

 Enter  MOUNG PHO MHIN  and  U. RAI GYAN THOO,  accompanied by the Court
Physicians and Astrologers .

"The King cannot live beyond the night,"  the Physicians say .   The
sudden ,  mysterious illness that has attacked him defies their skill .

 The Astrologers declare that the stars in their courses fight against
his recovery ;  unless a miracle should happen ,  the new day will see
him dead .

 The Ministers regard each other in consternation ;  then walk the
terrace with bent heads .

 The peacock on the wall spreads its tail and utters a melancholy cry of
poignant pain .

 The listeners start in superstitious horror .

 The peacock folds its tail and resumes its meditations .

"That bird is not as other birds,"  one astrologer declares .  "I have
watched it for years past--it is ever alone--the others all avoid it.  I
think it has a soul."

"You mistake,"  replies his colleague ; "it is but an evil Nat. {32}
Observe its eyes: they are not those of a bird; they are those of a
spirit in prison."

 They pass on in the wake of the ministers .

 The peacock closes its eyes .

 Enter the two young  PRINCES,  accompanied by two great Pegu hounds .
 They converse in subdued tones ,  strolling slowly .   They are followed
by pages of honour ,  carrying grain ,  which the young men proceed to
distribute amongst the birds as they rapidly approach them .   The
peacock on the wall never stirs ;  she watches the young men always .
 Then the elder one comes with a handful of food and proffers it ,  but
the peacock does not eat .

"I shall never understand you, Queen of the Kingdom of Birds,"  he says ,
 and strokes her feathers .   At his touch the plumage scintillates with
a brighter ,  a more exquisite sheen .

 He murmurs to the bird in soft tones and mythical words .   He tells it
that the fear of everyone is that the King is mortally stricken ,  for he
lies yonder in most strange and evil agony ;  that the hearts of himself
and his brother are numb with the sorrow that knows no language .   The
bird listens eagerly .   And if the King should go ,  he ,  the speaker ,
 will reign in his stead .   The prospect fills him with fear .   He
desires ,  as also his brother ,  if the King must die ,  to return to
dwell in the forest with the mother who he knows awaits them there .

 The peacock spreads its wings as if for flight ,  then crouches down
once more ,  and over it watches the young prince .

 The sun envelops them both in a sudden shaft of rose and purple and
gold .   A servant descends and comes across the grass .   He shikoes
profoundly to the two young men ,  lifting up his hands in the deepest
reverence of Burmah .

"The Lord of the Earth and the Sky desires his sons; he nears the Great
Unknown."

CURTAIN



SCENE IV


 The retreat of  HIP LOONG,  the Wizard .

 Time :  the same night .

 The curtain discovers  MAH PHRU,  who has returned to human form ,  and
the Wizard together .

 He tells her that he has restored her to her former state only because
she has implored him to do so ;  that her life is measured by hours as a
consequence of such insensate folly in breaking the vow of five years
back .

"But the King will live,"  she murmurs .

"The King will live.  He will find happiness with someone fairer than
you.  That is well.  Your life for his.  It is the price."

"The price is nothing.  Have I not looked on my heart's beloved one for
five years--looked on his face--heard his voice--trembled with joy at his
footsteps?  Have I not waited and watched?  Have I not gazed on my sons
and seen their royal bearing, and known their touch?"

"You are, then, content?"

"You are a Wizard--you can read that I am."

"It is not I that am a Wizard--it is Love.  That is the only Wizard this
world knows."

CURTAIN



SCENE V


 The bed-chamber of the King -- vast and shadowy .   On heaped-up
cushions and covers of yellow and blue ,  under a pearl-sewn creamy
velvet baldaquin ,  embroidered with peacocks ,  lies  MENG BENG,
 mortally stricken ;  his face bears the ashen pallor that only dark
skins know .   The ministers ,  the servants ,  the courtiers ,  the
countless motley gathering of an Eastern Court are scattered in anxious
groups ,  watching ,  waiting ,  murmuring .   Only the space near the
couch is clear .   Without ,  the dawn breaks over the sea ,  and ,
 stealing through the opening ,  makes the great chamber flush till it
looks like porphyry .

 The tolling of a deep gong and the voices of a myriad birds invade the
throbbing silence of the Palace .

"He passes,"  murmur the physicians .   Everyone's gaze turns to the
dying man .

"Yet his star is in the ascendant,"  say the astrologers .   The risen
sun touches him with its light like a caress .   He opens his eyes .   His
sons advance .   They raise him high on his cushions and give a
restorative .   The end has come .   Suddenly he rallies slightly .

 The doors at the far end are rudely opened .   A woman ,  young and
lovely ,  advances ,  thrusting roughly aside the many hands stretched
out to bar her path .

 She reaches the King .

"I bring you life, Star of my Soul,"  she cries , "I bring you life,"
 and so saying ,  falls dead at his feet .

 The Courtiers rush forward .

 The King rises .

 He stands erect .

 The sun lies like a golden benediction over all .

 Jewels glitter .

 The whole world of birds sing .

THE CURTAIN FALLS
