The Project Gutenberg EBook of Salted With Fire, by George MacDonald

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Salted With Fire

Author: George MacDonald


Release Date: October, 2005 [EBook #9154]
This file was first posted on September 8, 2003
Last Updated: April 18, 2013

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SALTED WITH FIRE ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Debra Storr and Distributed Proofreaders







SALTED WITH FIRE

By George Macdonald




CHAPTER I


"Whaur are ye aff til this bonny mornin', Maggie, my doo?" said the
soutar, looking up from his work, and addressing his daughter as she
stood in the doorway with her shoes in her hand.

"Jist ower to Stanecross, wi' yer leave, father, to speir the
mistress for a goupin or twa o' chaff: yer bed aneth ye's grown unco
hungry-like."

"Hoot, the bed's weel eneuch, lassie!"

"Na, it's onything but weel eneuch! It's my pairt to luik efter my ain
father, and see there be nae k-nots aither in his bed or his parritch."

"Ye're jist yer mither owre again, my lass!--Weel, I winna miss ye that
sair, for the minister 'ill be in this mornin'."

"Hoo ken ye that, father?"

"We didna gree vera weel last nicht."

"I canna bide the minister--argle-barglin body!"

"Toots, bairn! I dinna like to hear ye speyk sae scornfulike o' the gude
man that has the care o' oor sowls!"

"It wad be mair to the purpose ye had the care o' his!"

"Sae I hae: hasna ilkabody the care o' ilk ither's?"

"Ay; but he preshumes upo' 't--and ye dinna; there's the differ!"

"Weel, but ye see, lassie, the man has nae insicht--nane to speak o',
that is; and it's pleased God to mak him a wee stoopid, and some thrawn
(_twisted_). He has nae notion even o' the wark I put intil thae wee bit
sheenie (_little shoes_) o' his--that I'm this moment labourin ower!"

"It's sair wastit upo' him 'at caana see the thoucht intil't!"

"Is God's wark wastit upo' you and me excep' we see intil't, and
un'erstan't, Maggie?"

The girl was silent. Her father resumed.

"There's three concernt i' the matter o' the wark I may be at: first,
my ain duty to the wark--that's me; syne him I'm working for--that's
the minister; and syne him 'at sets me to the wark--ye ken wha that is:
whilk o' the three wad ye hae me lea' oot o' the consideration?"

For another moment the girl continued silent; then she said--

"Ye maun be i' the richt, father! I believe 't, though I canna jist
_see_ 't. A body canna like a'body, and the minister's jist the ae man I
canna bide."

"Ay could ye, gi'en ye lo'ed the _ane_ as he oucht to be lo'ed, and as
ye maun learn to lo'e him."

"Weel I'm no come to that wi' the minister yet!"

"It's a trowth--but a sair pity, my dautie _(daughter--darling)_."

"He provokes me the w'y that he speaks to ye, father--him 'at's no fit
to tie the thong o' your shee!"

"The Maister would lat him tie his, and say _thank ye_!"

"It aye seems to me he has sic a scrimpit way o' believin'! It's no like
believin' at a'! He winna trust him for naething that he hasna his ain
word, or some ither body's for! Ca' ye that lippenin' til him?"

It was now the father's turn to be silent for a moment. Then he said,--

"Lea' the judgin' o' him to his ain maister, lassie. I ha'e seen him
whiles sair concernt for ither fowk."

"'At they wouldna hand wi' _him,_ and war condemnt in consequence--wasna
that it?"

"I canna answer ye that, bairn."

"Weel, I ken he doesna like you--no ae wee bit. He's aye girdin at ye to
ither fowk!"

"May be: the mair's the need I sud lo'e him."

"But noo _can_ ye, father?"

"There's naething, o' late, I ha'e to be sae gratefu' for to _Him_ as
that I can. But I confess I had lang to try sair!"

"The mair I was to try, the mair I jist couldna."

"But ye could try; and He could help ye!"

"I dinna ken; I only ken that sae ye say, and I maun believe ye. Nane
the mair can I see hoo it's ever to be broucht aboot."

"No more can I, though I ken it can be. But just think, my ain Maggie,
hoo would onybody ken that ever ane o' 's was his disciple, gien we war
aye argle-barglin aboot the holiest things--at least what the minister
coonts the holiest, though may be I think I ken better? It's whan twa
o' 's strive that what's ca'd a schism begins, and I jist winna, please
God--and it does please him! He never said, Ye maun a' think the same
gait, but he did say, Ye man a' loe are anither, and no strive!"

"Ye dinna aye gang to his kirk, father!"

"Na, for I'm jist feared sometimes lest I should stop loein him. It
matters little about gaein to the kirk ilka Sunday, but it matters a
heap aboot aye loein are anither; and whiles he says things aboot the
mind o' God, sic that it's a' I can dee to sit still."

"Weel, father, I dinna believe that I can lo'e him ony the day; sae, wi'
yer leave, I s' be awa to Stanecross afore he comes."

"Gang yer wa's, lassie, and the Lord gang wi' ye, as ance he did wi'
them that gaed to Emmaus."

With her shoes in her hand, the girl was leaving the house when her
father called after her--

"Hoo's folk to ken that I provide for my ain, whan my bairn gangs
unshod? Tak aff yer shune gin ye like when ye're oot o' the toon."

"Are ye sure there's nae hypocrisy aboot sic a fause show, father?"
asked Maggie, laughing, "I maun hide them better!"

As she spoke she put the shoes in the empty bag she carried for the
chaff. "There's a hidin' o' what I hae--no a pretendin' to hae what I
haena!--Is' be hame in guid time for yer tay, father.--I can gang a heap
better withoot them!" she added, as she threw the bag over her shoulder.
"I'll put them on whan I come to the heather," she concluded.

"Ay, ay; gang yer wa's, and lea' me to the wark ye haena the grace to
adverteeze by weirin' o' 't."

Maggie looked in at the window as she passed it on her way, to get a
last sight of her father. The sun was shining into the little bare room,
and her shadow fell upon him as she passed him; but his form lingered
clear in the close chamber of her mind after she had left him far. And
it was not her shadow she had seen, but the shadow, rather, of a great
peace that rested concentred upon him as he bowed over his last, his
mind fixed indeed upon his work, but far more occupied with the affairs
of quite another region. Mind and soul were each so absorbed in its
accustomed labour that never did either interfere with that of the
other. His shoemaking lost nothing when he was deepest sunk in some
one or other of the words of his Lord, which he sought eagerly to
understand--nay, I imagine his shoemaking gained thereby. In his leisure
hours, not a great, he was yet an intense reader; but it was nothing in
any book that now occupied him; it was the live good news, the man Jesus
Christ himself. In thought, in love, in imagination, that man dwelt in
him, was alive in him, and made him alive. This moment He was with him,
had come to visit him--yet was never far from him--was present always
with an individuality that never quenched but was continually developing
his own. For the soutar absolutely believed in the Lord of Life, was
always trying to do the things he said, and to keep his words abiding in
him. Therefore was he what the parson called a mystic, and was the
most practical man in the neighbourhood; therefore did he make the best
shoes, because the Word of the Lord abode in him.

The door opened, and the minister came into the kitchen. The soutar
always worked in the kitchen, to be near his daughter, whose presence
never interrupted either his work or his thought, or even his
prayers--which often seemed as involuntary as a vital automatic impulse.

"It's a grand day!" said the minister. "It aye seems to me that just on
such a day will the Lord come, nobody expecting him, and the folk all
following their various callings--as when the flood came and astonished
them."

The man was but reflecting, without knowing it, what the soutar had
been saying the last time they encountered; neither did he think, at the
moment, that the Lord himself had said something like it first.

"And I was thinkin, this vera meenute," returned the soutar, "sic a
bonny day as it was for the Lord to gang aboot amang his ain fowk. I
was thinkin maybe he was come upon Maggie, and was walkin wi' her up the
hill to Stanecross--nearer til her, maybe, nor she could hear or see or
think!"

"Ye're a deal taen up wi' vain imaiginins, MacLear!" rejoined the
minister, tartly. "What scriptur hae ye for sic a wanderin' invention,
o' no practical value?"

"'Deed, sir, what scriptur hed I for takin my brakwast this mornin, or
ony mornin? Yet I never luik for a judgment to fa' upon me for that!
I'm thinkin we dee mair things in faith than we ken--but no eneuch! no
eneuch! I was thankfu' for't, though, I min' that, and maybe that'll
stan' for faith. But gien I gang on this gait, we'll be beginnin as
we left aff last nicht, and maybe fa' to strife! And we hae to loe ane
anither, not accordin to what the ane thinks, or what the ither thinks,
but accordin as each kens the Maister loes the ither, for he loes the
twa o' us thegither."

"But hoo ken ye that he's pleased wi' ye?"

"I said naething aboot that: I said he loes you and me!"

"For that, he maun be pleast wi' ye!"

"I dinna think nane aboot that; I jist tak my life i' my han', and awa'
wi' 't til _Him_;--and he's never turned his face frae me yet.--Eh, sir!
think what it would be gien ever he did!"

"But we maunna think o' him ither than he would hae us think."

"That's hoo I'm aye hingin aboot his door, luikin for him."

"Weel, I kenna what to mak o' ye! I maun jist lea' ye to him!"

"Ye couldna dee a kinder thing! I desire naething better frae man or
minister than be left to Him."

"Weel, weel, see til yersel."

"I'll see to _him_, and try to loe my neebour--that's you, Mr. Pethrie.
I'll hae yer shune ready by Setterday, sir. I trust they'll be worthy
o' the feet that God made, and that hae to be shod by me. I trust and
believe they'll nowise distress ye, sir, or interfere wi' yer comfort
in preachin. I'll fess them hame mysel, gien the Lord wull, and that
without fail."

"Na, na; dinna dee that; lat Maggie come wi' them. Ye wad only be puttin
me oot o' humour for the Lord's wark wi' yer havers!"

"Weel, I'll sen' Maggie--only ye wad obleege me by no seein her, for ye
micht put _her_ oot o' humour, sir, and she michtna gie yer sermon fair
play the morn!"

The minister closed the door with some sharpness.




CHAPTER II


In the meantime, Maggie was walking shoeless and bonnetless up the hill
to the farm she sought. It was a hot morning in June, tempered by a wind
from the north-west. The land was green with the slow-rising tide of
the young corn, among which the cool wind made little waves, showing the
brown earth between them on the somewhat arid face of the hill. A few
fleecy clouds shared the high blue realm with the keen sun. As she rose
to the top of the road, the gable of the house came suddenly in sight,
and near it a sleepy old gray horse, treading his ceaseless round at the
end of a long lever, too listless to feel the weariness of a labour
that to him must have seemed unprogressive, and, to anything young,
heart-breaking. Nor did it appear to give him any consolation to be
aware of the commotion he was causing on the other side of the wall,
where a threshing machine of an antiquated sort responded with multiform
movement to the monotony of his round-and-round.

Near by, a peacock, as conscious of his glorious plumage as indifferent
to the ugliness of his feet, kept time with undulating neck to the
motion of those same feet, as he strode with stagey gait across the
cornyard, now and then stooping to pick up a stray grain spitefully, and
occasionally erecting his superb neck to give utterance to a hideous cry
of satisfaction at his own beauty--a cry as unlike the beauty as ever
was discord to harmony. His glory, his legs and his voice, perplexed
Maggie with an unanalyzed sense of contradiction and unfitness.

Radiant with age and light, the old horse stood still just as the sun
touched the meridian; the hour of repose and food was come, and he knew
it; and at the same moment the girl, passing one of the green-painted
doors of the farm house, stopped at the other, the kitchen one. It stood
open, and in answer to her modest knock, a ruddy maid appeared, with
a question in her eyes, and a smile on her lips at sight of the
shoemaker's Maggie, whom she knew well. Maggie asked if She might see
the mistress.

"Here's soutar's Maggie wanting ye, mem!" said the maid and Mistress
Blatherwick who was close at hand, came; to which Maggie humbly but
confidently making her request had it as kindly granted, and followed
her to the barn to fill her pock with the light plumy covering of the
husk of the oats, the mistress of Stonecross helping her the while
and talking to her as she did so--for the soutar and his daughter were
favourites with her and her husband, and they had not seen either of
them for some while.

"Ye used to ken oor Maister Jeames I' the auld land-syne, Maggie!" for
the two has played together as children in the same school although
growth and difference in station had gradually put and end to
their intimacy so that it became the mother to refer to him with
circumspection, seeing that, in her eyes at least, Maister Jeames was
now far on the way to becoming a great man, being a divinity student;
for in the Scotch church, although it sets small store on apostolitic
descent, every Minister, until he has shown himself eccentic or
incapable of interesting a congregation, is regarded with quite as
much respect as in England is accorded to the claimant of a
phantom-priesthood; and therefore, prospectively, Jeames was to his
mother a man of no little note. Maggie remembered how, when a boy, he
had liked to talk with her father; and how her father would listen to
him with a curious look on his rugged face, while the boy set forth
the commonplaces of a lifeless theology with an occasional freshness
of logical presentation that at least interested himself. But she
remembered also that she had never heard the soutar on his side make
any attempt to lay open to the boy his stores of what one or two in the
place, one or two only, counted wisdom and knowledge.

"He's a gey clever laddie," he had said once to Maggie, "and gien he
gets his een open i' the coorse o' the life he's hardly yet ta'en hand
o', he'll doobtless see something; but he disna ken yet that there's
onything rael to be seen, ootside or inside o' him!" When he heard that
he was going to study divinity, he shook his head, and was silent.

"I'm jist hame frae peyin him a short veesit," Mrs. Blatherwick went on.
"I cam hame but twa nichts ago. He's lodged wi' a dacent widow in Arthur
Street, in a flat up a lang stane stair that gangs roun and roun till ye
come there, and syne gangs past the door and up again. She taks in han'
to luik efter his claes, and sees to the washin o' them, and does her
best to hand him tidy; but Jeamie was aye that partic'lar aboot his
appearance! And that's a guid thing, special in a minister, wha has to
set an example! I was sair pleased wi' the auld body."

There was one in the Edinburgh lodging, however, of whom Mrs.
Blatherwick had but a glimpse, and of whom, therefore, she had made no
mention to her husband any more than now to Maggie MacLear; indeed, she
had taken so little notice of her that she could hardly be said to
have seen her at all--a girl of about sixteen, who did far more for the
comfort of her aunt's two lodgers than she who reaped all the advantage.
If Mrs. Blatherwick had let her eyes rest upon her but for a moment, she
would probably have looked again; and might have discovered that she was
both a good-looking and graceful little creature, with blue eyes, and
hair as nearly black as that kind of hair, both fine and plentiful, ever
is. She might then have discovered as well a certain look of earnestness
and service that would at first have attracted her for its own sake, and
then repelled her for James's; for she would assuredly have read in it
what she would have counted dangerous for him; but seeing her poorly
dressed, and looking untidy, which at the moment she could not help, the
mother took her for an ordinary maid-of-all-work, and never for a moment
doubted that her son must see her just as she did. He was her only son;
her heart was full of ambition for him; and she brooded on the honour
he was destined to bring her and his father. The latter, however, caring
less for his good looks, had neither the same satisfaction in him nor an
equal expectation from him. Neither of his parents, indeed, had as yet
reaped much pleasure from his existence, however much one of them might
hope for in the time to come. There were two things indeed against such
satisfaction or pleasure--that James had never been open-hearted toward
them, never communicative as to his feelings, or even his doings;
and--which was worse--that he had long made them feel in him a certain
unexpressed claim to superiority. Nor would it have lessened their
uneasiness at this to have noted that the existence of such an implicit
claim was more or less evident in relation to every one with whom
he came in contact, manifested mainly by a stiff, incommunicative
reluctance, taking the form now of a pretended absorption in his books,
now of contempt for any sort of manual labour, even to the saddling of
the pony he was about to ride; and now and always by an affectation of
proper English, which, while successful as to grammar and accentuation,
did not escape the ludicrous in a certain stiltedness of tone and
inflection, from which intrusion of the would-be gentleman, his father,
a simple, old-fashioned man, shrank with more of dislike than he was
willing to be conscious of.

Quite content that, having a better education than himself, his son
should both be and show himself superior, he could not help feeling that
these his ways of asserting himself were signs of mere foolishness, and
especially as conjoined with his wish to be a minister--in regard to
which Peter but feebly sympathized with the general ambition of Scots
parents. Full of simple paternal affection, whose utterance was quenched
by the behaviour of his son, he was continuously aware of something that
took the shape of an impassable gulf between James and his father and
mother. Profoundly religious, and readily appreciative of what was new
in the perception of truth, he was, above all, of a great and simple
righteousness--full, that is, of a loving sense of fairplay--a
very different thing indeed from that which most of those who count
themselves religious mean when they talk of the righteousness of God!
Little, however, was James able to see of this, or of certain other
great qualities in his father. I would not have my reader think that he
was consciously disrespectful to either of his parents, or knew that his
behaviour was unloving. He honoured their character, indeed, but shrank
from the simplicity of their manners; he thought of them with no
lively affection, though not without some kindly feeling and much
confidence--at the same time regarding himself with still greater
confidence. He had never been an idler, or disobedient; and had made
such efforts after theological righteousness as served to bolster
rather than buttress his conviction that he was a righteous youth,
and nourished his ignorance of the fact that he was far from being the
person of moral strength and value that he imagined himself. The person
he saw in the mirror of his self-consciousness was a very fine and
altogether trustworthy personage; the reality so twisted in its
reflection was but a decent lad, as lads go, with high but untrue
notions of personal honour, and an altogether unwarranted conviction
that such as he admiringly imagined himself, such he actually was: he
had never discovered his true and unworthy self! There were many things
in his life and ways upon which had he but fixed eyes of question, he
would at once have perceived that they were both judged and condemned;
but so far, nevertheless, his father and mother might have good hope of
his future.

It is folly to suppose that such as follow most the fashions of this
world are more enslaved by them than multitudes who follow them only
afar off. These reverence the judgments of society in things of far
greater importance than the colour or cut of a gown; often without
knowing it, they judge life, and truth itself, by the falsest of all
measures, namely, the judgment of others falser than themselves; they do
not ask what is true or right, but what folk think and say about this
or that. James, for instance, altogether missed being a gentleman by his
habit of asking himself how, in such or such circumstances, a gentleman
would behave. As the man of honour he would fain know himself, he would
never tell a lie or break a promise; but he had not come to perceive
that there are other things as binding as the promise which alone
he regarded as obligatory. He did not, for instance, mind raising
expectations which he had not the least intention of fulfilling.

Being a Scotch lad, it is not to be wondered at that he should turn
to Theology as a means of livelihood; neither is it surprising that
he should do so without any conscious love to God, seeing it is not in
Scotland alone that untrue men take refuge in the Church, and turn the
highest of professions into the meanest, laziest, poorest, and most
unworthy, by following it without any genuine call to the same. In
any profession, the man must be a poor common creature who follows
it without some real interest in it; but he who without a spark of
enthusiasm for it turns to the Church, is either a "blind mouth," as
Milton calls him--scornfullest of epithets, or an "old wife" ambitious
of telling her fables well; and James's ambition was of the same
contemptible sort--that, namely, of distinguishing himself in the
pulpit. This, if he had the natural gift of eloquence, he might well do
by its misuse to his own glory; or if he had it not, he might acquire a
spurious facility resembling it, and so be every way a mere windbag.

Mr. Petrie, whom it cost the soutar so much care and effort to love, and
who, although intellectually small, was yet a good man, and by no means
a coward where he judged people's souls in danger, thought to save
the world by preaching a God, eminently respectable to those who could
believe in such a God, but to those who could not, a God far from lovely
because far from righteous. His life, nevertheless, showed him in many
ways a believer in Him who revealed a very different God indeed from the
God he set forth. His faith, therefore, did not prevent him from looking
upon the soutar, who believed only in the God he saw in Jesus Christ,
as one in a state of rebellion against him whom Jesus claimed as his
father.

Young Blatherwick had already begun to turn his back upon several of the
special tenets of Calvinism, without, however, being either a better or
a worse man because of the change in his opinions. He had cast aside,
for instance, the doctrine of an everlasting hell for the unbeliever;
but in doing so he became aware that he was thus leaving fallow a great
field for the cultivation of eloquence; and not having yet discovered
any other equally productive of the precious crop, without which so
little was to be gained for the end he desired--namely, the praise of
men, he therefore kept on, "for the meantime," sowing and preparing to
reap that same field. Mr. Petrie, on the other hand, held the doctrine
as absolutely fundamental to Christianity, and preached it with power;
while the soutar, who had discarded it from his childhood, positively
refused, jealous of strife, to enter into any argument upon it with the
disputatious little man.

As yet, then, James was reading Scotch metaphysics, and reconciling
himself to the concealment of his freer opinions, upon which concealment
depended the success of his probation, and his license. But the close of
his studies in divinity was now near at hand.




CHAPTER III


Upon a certain stormy day in the great northern city, preparing for
what he regarded as his career, James sat in the same large, shabbily
furnished room where his mother had once visited him--half-way up the
hideously long spiral stair of an ancient house, whose entrance was in a
narrow close. The great clock of a church in the neighbouring street had
just begun to strike five of a wintry afternoon, dark with snow, falling
and yet to fall: how often in after years was he not to hear the ghostly
call of that clock, and see that falling snow!--when a gentle tap came
to his door, and the girl I have already mentioned came in with a tray
and the materials for his most welcomed meal, coffee with bread and
butter. She set it down in a silence which was plainly that of deepest
respect, gave him one glance of devotion, and was turning to leave the
room, when he looked up from the paper he was writing, and said--

"Don't be in such a hurry, Isy. Haven't you time to pour out my coffee
for me?"

Isy was a small, dark, neat little thing, with finely formed features,
and a look of child-like simplicity, not altogether removed from
childishness. She answered him first with her very blue eyes full of
love and trust, then said--

"Plenty o' time, sir. What other have I to do than see that you be at
your ease?"

He shoved aside his work, and looking up with some concentration in his
regard, pushed his chair back a little from the table, and rejoined--

"What's the matter with you this last day or two, Isy? You're not
altogether like yourself!"

She hesitated a moment, then answered--

"It can be naething, I suppose, sir, but just that I'm growin older and
beginnin to think aboot things."

She stood near him. He put his arm round her little waist, and would
have drawn her down upon his knees, but she resisted.

"I don't see what difference that can make in you all at once, Isy!
We've known each other so long that there can be no misunderstanding of
any sort between us. You have always behaved like the good and modest
girl you are; and I'm sure you have been most attentive to me all the
time I have been in your aunt's house."

He spoke in a tone of superior approval.

"It was my bare duty, and ye hae aye been kinder to me than I could hae
had ony richt to expec'. But it's nearhan' ower noo!" she concluded with
a sigh that indicated approaching tears, as she yielded a little to the
increased pressure of his arm.

"What makes you say that?" he returned, giving her a warm kiss, plainly
neither unwelcome nor the first.

"Dinna ye think it would be better to drop that kin' o' thing the noo,
sir?" she said, and would have stood erect, but he held her fast.

"Why now, more than any time--I don't know for how long? Where does a
difference come in? What puts the notion in your pretty little head?"

"It maun come some day, and the langer the harder it'll be!"

"But tell me what has set you thinking about it all at once?"

She burst into tears. He tried to soothe and comfort her, but in
struggling not to cry she only sobbed the worse. At last, however, she
succeeded in faltering out an explanation.

"Auntie's been tellin me that I maun luik to my hert, so as no to tyne't
to ye a'thegither! But it's awa a'ready," she went on, with a fresh
outburst, "and it's no manner o' use cryin til't to come back to me. I
micht as weel cry upo' the win' as it blaws by me! I canna understan'
't! I ken weel ye'll soon be a great man, and a' the toon crushin to
hear ye; and I ken jist as weel that I'll hae to sit still in my seat
and luik up to ye whaur ye stan', no daurin to say a word--no daurin
even to think a thoucht lest somebody sittin aside me should hear't ohn
me spoken. For what would it be but clean impidence o' me to think 'at
there was a time when I was sittin whaur I'm sittin the noo--and thinkin
't i' the vera kirk! I would be nearhan' deein for shame!"

"Didn't you ever think, Isy, that maybe I might marry you some day?"
said James jokingly, confident in the gulf between them.

"Na, no ance. I kenned better nor that! I never even wusst it, for that
would be nae freen's wuss: ye would never get ony farther gien ye did!
I'm nane fit for a minister's wife--nor worthy o' bein ane! I micht
do no that ill, and pass middlin weel, in a sma' clachan wi' a wee bit
kirkie--but amang gran' fowk, in a muckle toon--for that's whaur ye're
sure to be! Eh me, me! A' the last week or twa I hae seen ye driftin
awa frae me, oot and oot to the great sea, whaur never a thoucht o' Isy
would come nigh ye again;--and what for should there? Ye camna into the
warl' to think aboot me or the likes o' me, but to be a great preacher,
and lea' me ahin ye, like a sheaf o' corn ye had jist cuttit and left
unbun'!"

Here came another burst of bitter weeping, followed by words whose very
articulation was a succession of sobs.

"Eh, me, me! I doobt I hae clean disgraced mysel!" she cried at last,
and ended, wiping her eyes--in vain, for the tears would keep flowing.

As to young Blatherwick, I venture to assert that nothing vulgar or
low, still less of evil intent, was passing through his mind during this
confession; and yet what but evil was his unpitying, selfish exultation
in the fact that this simple-hearted and very pretty girl should love
him unsought, and had told him so unasked? A true-hearted man would
at once have perceived and shrunk from what he was bringing upon her:
James's vanity only made him think it very natural, and more than
excusable in her; and while his ambition made him imagine himself so
much her superior as to exclude the least thought of marrying her, it
did not prevent him from yielding to the delight her confession caused
him, or from persuading her that there was no harm in loving one to whom
she must always be dear, whatever his future might bring with it. Isy
left the room not a little consoled, and with a new hope in possession
of her innocent imagination; leaving James exultant over his conquest,
and indulging a more definite pleasure than hitherto in the person and
devotion of the girl. As to any consciousness in him of danger to either
of them, it was no more than, on the shore, the uneasy stir of a storm
far out at sea. Had the least thought of wronging her invaded his mind,
he would have turned from it with abhorrence; yet was he endangering all
her peace without giving it one reasonable thought. He was acting with a
selfishness too much ingrained to manifest its own unlovely shape; while
in his mind lay all the time a half-conscious care to avoid making the
girl any promise.

As to her fitness for a minister's wife, he had never asked himself a
question concerning it; but in truth she might very soon have grown far
fitter for the position than he was for that of a minister. In character
she was much beyond him; and in breeding and consciousness far more of
a lady than he of a gentleman--fine gentleman as he would fain know
himself. Her manners were immeasurably better than his, because they
were simple and aimed at nothing. Instinctively she avoided whatever,
had she done it, she would at once have recognized as uncomely. She did
not know that simplicity was the purest breeding, yet from mere truth of
nature practised it unknowing. If her words were older-fashioned, that
is more provincial than his, at least her tone was less so, and her
utterance was prettier than if, like him, she had aped an Anglicized
mode of speech. James would, I am sure, have admired her more if she
had been dressed on Sundays in something more showy than a simple cotton
gown; and I fear that her poverty had its influence in the freedoms he
allowed himself with her.

Her aunt was a weak as well as unsuspicious woman, who had known better
days, and pitied herself because they were past and gone. She gave
herself no anxiety as to her niece's prudence, but continued well
assured of it even while her very goodness was conspiring against her
safety. It would have required a man, not merely of greater goodness
than James, but of greater insight into the realities of life as well,
to perceive the worth and superiority of the girl who waited upon him
with a devotion far more angelic than servile; for whatever might
have seemed to savour of the latter, had love, hopeless of personal
advantage, at the root of it.

Thus things went on for a while, with a continuous strengthening of the
pleasant yet not altogether easy bonds in which Isobel walked, and
a constant increase of the attraction that drew the student to the
self-yielding girl; until the appearance of another lodger in the house
was the means of opening Blatherwick's eyes to the state of his own
feelings, by occasioning the birth and recognition of a not unnatural
jealousy, which "gave him pause." On Isy's side there was not the least
occasion for this jealousy, and he knew it; but not the less he saw
that, if he did not mean to go further, here he must stop--the immediate
result of which was that he began to change a little in his behaviour
toward her, when at any time she had to enter his room in ministration
to his wants.

Of this change the poor girl was at once aware, but she attributed it
to a temporary absorption in his studies. Soon, however, she could not
doubt that not merely was his voice or his countenance changed toward
her, but that his heart had grown cold, and that he was no longer
"friends with her." For there was another and viler element than mere
jealousy concerned in his alteration: he had become aware of a more
real danger into which he was rapidly drifting--that of irrecoverably
blasting the very dawn of his prospects by an imprudent marriage. "To
saddle himself with a wife," as he vulgarily expressed it, before he had
gained his license--before even he had had the poorest opportunity of
distinguishing himself in that wherein lay his every hope and
ambition of proving his excellence, was a thing not for a moment to
be contemplated! And now, when Isobel asked him in sorrowful mood some
indifferent question, the uneasy knowledge that he was about to increase
her sadness made him answer her roughly--a form not unnatural to
incipient compunction: white as a ghost she stood a moment silently
staring at him, then sank on the floor senseless.

Seized with an overmastering repentance that brought back with a rush
all his tenderness, James sprang to her, lifted her in his arms, laid
her on the sofa, and lavished caresses upon her, until at length she
recovered sufficiently to know where she lay--in the false paradise of
his arms, with him kneeling over her in a passion of regret, the first
passion he had ever felt or manifested toward her, pouring into her ear
words of incoherent dismay--which, taking shape as she revived, soon
became promises and vows. Thereupon the knowledge that he had committed
himself, and the conviction that he was henceforth bound to one course
in regard to her, wherein he seemed to himself incapable of falsehood,
unhappily freed him from the self-restraint then most imperative upon
him, and his trust in his own honour became the last loop of the snare
about to entangle his and her very life. At the moment when a genuine
love would have hastened to surround the woman with bulwarks of safety,
he ceased to regard himself as his sister's keeper. Even thus did Cain
cease to be his brother's keeper, and so slew him.

But the vengeance on his unpremeditated treachery, for treachery,
although unpremeditated, it was none the less, came close upon its
heels. The moment that Isy left the room, weeping and pallid, conscious
that a miserable shame but waited the entrance of a reflection even now
importunate, he threw himself on the floor, writhing as in the claws of
a hundred demons. The next day but one he was to preach his first sermon
before his class, in the presence of his professor of divinity! His
immediate impulse was to rush from the house, and home hot-foot to his
mother; and it would have been well for him to have done so indeed,
confessed all, and turned his back on the church and his paltry ambition
together! But he had never been open with his mother, and he feared his
father, not knowing the tender righteousness of that father's heart,
or the springs of love which would at once have burst open to meet the
sorrowful tale of his wretched son; and instead of fleeing at once
to his one city of refuge, he fell but to pacing the room in hopeless
bewilderment; and before long he was searching every corner of his
reviving consciousness, not indeed as yet for any justification, but
for what palliation of his "fault" might there be found; for it was the
first necessity of this self-lover to think well, or at least endurably,
of himself. Nor was it long before a multitude of sneaking arguments,
imps of Satan, began to assemble at the agonized cry of his
self-dissatisfaction--for it was nothing more.

For, in that agony of his, there was no detestation of himself because
of his humiliation of the trusting Isobel; he did not loathe his abuse
of her confidence, or his having wrapt her in the foul fire-damp of his
miserable weakness: the hour of a true and good repentance was for him
not yet come; shame only as yet possessed him, because of the failure
of his own fancied strength. If it should ever come to be known, what
contempt would not clothe him, instead of the garments of praise of
which he had dreamed all these years! The pulpit, that goal of his
ambition, that field of his imagined triumphs--the very thought of
it now for a time made him feel sick. Still, there at least lay yet a
possibility of recovery--not indeed by repentance, of which he did not
seek to lay hold, but in the chance that no one might hear a word of
what had happened! Sure he felt, that Isy would never reveal it, and
least of all to her aunt! His promise to marry Isy he would of course
keep! Neither would that be any great hardship, if only it had no
consequences. As an immediate thing, however, it was not to be thought
of! there could be at the moment no necessity for such an extreme
measure! He would wait and see! he would be guided by events! As to
the sin of the thing--how many had not fallen like him, and no one the
wiser! Never would he so offend again! and in the meantime he would let
it go, and try to forget it--in the hope that providence now, and at
length time, would bury it from all men's sight! He would go on the same
as if the untoward thing had not so cruelly happened, had cast no such
cloud over the fair future before him! Nor were his selfish regrets
unmingled with annoyance that Isy should have yielded so easily: why had
she not aided him to resist the weakness that had wrought his undoing?
She was as much to blame as he; and for her unworthiness was he to be
left to suffer? Within an hour he had returned to the sermon under his
hand, and was revising it for the twentieth time, to perfect it before
finally committing it to memory; for so should the lie of his life
be crowned with success, and seem the thing it was not--an outcome of
extemporaneous feeling! During what remained of the two days following
he spared no labour, and at last delivered it with considerable unction,
and the feeling that he had achieved his end.

Neither of those days did Isy make her appearance in his room, her aunt
excusing her apparent neglect with the information that she was in bed
with a bad headache, while herself she supplied her place.

The next day Isy went about her work as usual, but never once looked up.
James imagined reproach in her silence, and did not venture to address
her, having, indeed, no wish to speak to her, for what was there to be
said? A cloud was between them; a great gulf seemed to divide them! He
wondered at himself, no longer conscious of her attraction, or of his
former delight in her proximity. His resolve to marry her was not yet
wavering; he fully intended to keep his promise; but he must wait the
proper time, the right opportunity for revealing to his parents the fact
of his engagement! After a few days, however, during which there had
been no return to their former familiarity, it was with a fearful kind
of relief that he learned she was gone to pay a visit to a relation in
the country. He did not care that she had gone without taking leave of
him, only wondered if she could have said anything to incriminate him.

The session came to an end while she was still absent; he took a formal
leave of her aunt, and went home to Stonecross.

His father at once felt a wider division between them than before, and
his mother was now compelled, much against her will, to acknowledge to
herself its existence. At the same time he carried himself with less
arrogance, and seemed humbled rather than uplifted by his success.

During the year that followed, he made several visits to Edinburgh, and
before long received the presentation to a living in the gift of his
father's landlord, a certain duke who had always been friendly to the
well-to-do and unassuming tenant of one of his largest farms in the
north. But during none of these visits did he inquire or hear anything
about Isy; neither now, when, without blame he might have taken steps
toward the fulfilment of the promise which he had never ceased to regard
as binding, could he persuade himself that the right time had come for
revealing it to his parents: he knew it would be a great blow to his
mother to learn that he had so handicapped his future, and he feared the
silent face of his father at the announcement of it.

It is hardly necessary to say that he had made no attempt to establish
any correspondence with the poor girl. Indeed by this time he found
himself not unwilling to forget her, and cherished a hope that she had,
if not forgotten, at least dismissed from her mind all that had taken
place between them. Now and then in the night he would wake to a few
tender thoughts of her, but before the morning they would vanish,
and during the day he would drown any chance reminiscence of her in a
careful polishing and repolishing of his sentences, aping the style
of Chalmers or of Robert Hall, and occasionally inserting some
fine-sounding quotation; for apparent richness of composition was his
principal aim, not truth of meaning, or lucidity of utterance.

I can hardly be presumptuous in adding that, although growing in a
certain popularity with men, he was not thus growing in favour with
God. And as he continued to hear nothing about Isy, the hope at length,
bringing with it a keen shoot of pleasure, awoke in him that he was
never to hear of her more. For the praise of men, and the love of that
praise, having now restored him to his own good graces, he regarded
himself with more interest and approbation than ever; and his continued
omission of inquiry after Isy, heedless of the predicament in which
he might have placed her, was a far worse sin against her, because
deliberate, than his primary wrong to her, and it now recoiled upon him
in increased hardness of heart and self-satisfaction.

Thus in love with himself, and thereby shut out from the salvation of
love to another, he was specially in danger of falling in love with the
admiration of any woman; and thence now occurred a little episode in his
history not insignificant in its results.

He had not been more than a month or two in his parish when he was
attracted by a certain young woman in his congregation of some inborn
refinement and distinction of position, to whom he speedily became
anxious to recommend himself: he must have her approval, and, if
possible, her admiration! Therefore in his preaching, if the word
used for the lofty, simple utterance of divine messengers, may without
offence be misapplied to his paltry memorizations, his main thought was
always whether the said lady was justly appreciating the eloquence and
wisdom with which he meant to impress her--while in fact he remained
incapable of understanding how deep her natural insight penetrated both
him and his pretensions. Her probing attention, however, he so entirely
misunderstood that it gave him no small encouragement; and thus becoming
only the more eager after her good opinion, he came at length to imagine
himself heartily in love with her--a thing impossible to him with
any woman--and at last, emboldened by the fancied importance of his
position, and his own fancied distinction in it, he ventured an offer
of his feeble hand and feebler heart;--but only to have them, to his
surprise, definitely and absolutely refused. He turned from the lady's
door a good deal disappointed, but severely mortified; and, judging it
impossible for any woman to keep silence concerning such a refusal, and
unable to endure the thought of the gossip to ensue, he began at once
to look about him for a refuge, and frankly told his patron the whole
story. It happened to suit his grace's plans, and he came speedily to
his assistance with the offer of his native parish--whence the soutar's
argumentative antagonist had just been removed to a place, probably not
a very distinguished one, in the kingdom of heaven; and it seemed to all
but a natural piety when James Blatherwick exchanged his parish for that
where he was born, and where his father and mother continued to occupy
the old farm.




CHAPTER IV


The soutar was still meditating on things spiritual, still reading the
gospel of St. John, still making and mending shoes, and still watching
the development of his daughter, who had begun to unfold what not a few
of the neighbours, with most of whom she was in favour, counted beauty.
The farm labourers in the vicinity were nearly all more or less her
admirers, and many a pair of shoes was carried to her father for the
sake of a possible smile from Maggie; but because of a certain awe that
seemed to pervade her presence, no one had as yet dared a word to her
beyond that of greeting or farewell: each that looked upon her became at
once aware of a certain inferiority. Her beauty seemed to suggest behind
it a beauty it was unable to reveal.

She was rather short in stature, but altogether well proportioned, with
a face wonderfully calm and clear, and quiet but keen dark eyes. Her
complexion owed its white-rose tinge to a strong, gentle life, and its
few freckles to the pale sun of Scotland, for she courted every breeze
bonnetless on the hills, when she accompanied her father in his walks,
or carried home the work he had finished. He rejoiced especially that
she should delight in feeling the wind about her, for he held it to
indicate sympathy with that spirit whose symbol it was, and which he
loved to think of as folding her about, closer and more lovingly than
his own cherishing soul.

Of her own impulse, and almost from the moment of her mother's death,
she had given herself to his service, first in doing all the little
duties of the house, and then, as her strength and faculty grew, in
helping him more and more in his trade. As soon as she had cleared away
the few things necessary for a breakfast of porridge and milk, Maggie
would hasten to join her father where he stooped over his last, for he
was a little shortsighted.

When he lifted his head you might see that, notwithstanding the
ruggedness of his face, he was a good looking man, with strong,
well-proportioned features, in which, even on Sundays, when he scrubbed
his face unmercifully, there would still remain lines suggestive of
ingrained rosin and heelball. On week days he was not so careful to
remove every sign of the labour by which he earned his bread; but when
his work was over till the morning, and he was free to sit down to a
book, he would never even touch one without first carefully washing his
hands and face. In the workshop, Maggie's place was a leather-seated
stool like her father's, a yard or so away from his, to leave room for
his elbows in drawing out the lingels (_rosined threads_): there she
would at once resume the work she had left unfinished the night before;
for it was a curious trait in the father, early inherited by the
daughter, that he would never rise from a finished job, however near
might be the hour for dropping work, without having begun another to go
on with in the morning. It was wonderful how much cleaner Maggie managed
to keep her hands; but then to her fell naturally the lighter work for
women and children. She declared herself ambitious, however, of one day
making with her own hands a perfect pair of top-boots.

The advantages she gained from this constant intercourse with her father
were incalculable. Without the least loss to her freedom of thought,
nay, on the contrary, to the far more rapid development of her truest
liberty, the soutar seemed to avoid no subject as unsuitable for the
girl's consideration, but to insist only on its being regarded from the
highest attainable point of view. Matters of indifferent import they
seldom, if ever, discussed at all; and nothing she knew her father cared
about did Maggie ever allude to with indifference. Full of an honest
hilarity ever ready to break out when occasion occurred, she was at the
same time incapable of a light word upon a sacred subject. Such jokes
as, more than elsewhere, one is in danger of hearing among the clergy of
every church, very seldom came out in her father's company; and she
very early became aware of the kind of joke he would take or refuse.
The light use, especially, of any word of the Lord would sink him in a
profound silence. If it were an ordinary man who thus offended, he might
rebuke him by asking if he remembered who said those words; once, when
it was a man specially regarded who gave the offence, I heard him say
something to this effect, "The maister doesna forget whaur and whan he
spak thae words: I houp ye do forget!" Indeed the most powerful force
in the education of Maggie was the evident attitude of her father toward
that Son of Man who was even now bringing the children of God to the
knowledge of that Father of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is
named. Mingling with her delights in the inanimate powers of Nature, in
the sun and the wind, in the rain and the growth, in the running waters
and the darkness sown with stars, was such a sense of His presence that
she felt like him, He might at any moment appear to her father, or,
should it so please Him, even to herself.

Two or three miles away, in the heart of the hills, on the outskirts of
the farm of Stonecross, lived an old cottar and his wife, who paid a few
shillings of rent to Mr. Blatherwick for the acre or two their ancestors
had redeemed from the heather and bog, and gave, with their one son
who remained at home, occasional service on the farm. They were much
respected by the farmer and his wife, as well as the small circle to
which they were known in the neighbouring village--better known, and
more respected still in that kingdom called of heaven; for they were
such as he to whom the promise was given, that he should yet see the
angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man. They had long
and heartily loved and honoured the soutar, whom they had known before
the death of his wife, and for his sake and hers, both had always
befriended the motherless Maggie. They could not greatly pity her,
seeing she had such a father, yet old Eppie had her occasional moments
of anxiety as to how the bairn would grow up without a mother's care.
No sooner, however, did the little one begin to show character, than
Eppie's doubt began to abate; and long before the time to which my
narrative has now come, the child and the child like old woman were fast
friends. Maggie was often invited to spend a day at Bogsheuch--oftener
indeed than she felt at liberty to leave her father and their common
work, though not oftener than she would have liked to go.

One morning, early in summer, when first the hillsides had begun to look
attractive, a small agricultural cart, such as is now but seldom seen,
with little paint except on its two red wheels, and drawn by a thin,
long-haired little horse, stopped at the door of the soutar's house,
clay-floored and straw-thatched, in a back-lane of the village. It was
a cart the cottar used in the cultivation of his little holding, and his
son who drove it, now nearly middle-aged, was likely to succeed to the
hut and acres of Bogsheuch. Man and equipage, both well known to the
soutar, had come with an invitation, more pressing than usual, that
Maggie would pay them a visit of a few days.

Father and daughter, consulting together in the presence of Andrew
Cormack, arrived at the conclusion that, work being rather slacker than
usual, and nobody in need of any promised job which the soutar could not
finish by himself in good time, Maggie was quite at liberty to go. She
sprang up joyfully--not without a little pang at the thought of leaving
her father alone, although she knew him quite equal to anything
that could be required in the house before her return--and set about
preparing their dinner, while Andrew went to execute a few commissions
that the mistress at Stonecross and his mother at Bogsheuch had given
him. By the time he returned, Maggie was in her Sunday gown, with her
week-day wrapper and winsey petticoat in a bundle--for she reckoned on
being of some use to Eppie during her visit When they had eaten their
humble dinner, Andrew brought the cart to the door, and Maggie scrambled
into it.

"Tak a piece wi' ye," said her father, following her to the cart: "ye
hadna muckle to yer denner, and ye may be hungry again or ye hae the
lang road ahint ye!"

He put several pieces of oatcake in her hand, which she received with a
loving smile; and they set out at a walking pace, which Andrew made no
attempt to quicken.

It was far from a comfortable carriage, neither was her wisp of straw in
the bottom of it altogether comfortable to sit upon; but the change from
her stool and the close attention her work required, to the open air
and the free rush of the thoughts that came crowding to her out of
the wilderness, put her at once in a blissful mood. Even the few dull
remarks that the slow-thinking Andrew made at intervals from his perch
on the front of the cart, seemed to come to her from the realm of
Faerie, the mysterious world that lay in the folds of the huddled hills.
Everything Maggie saw or heard that afternoon seemed to wear the glamour
of God's imagination, which is at once the birth and the very truth of
everything. Selfishness alone can rub away that divine gilding, without
which gold itself is poor indeed.

Suddenly the little horse stood still. Andrew, waking up from a snooze,
jumped to the ground, and began, still half asleep, to search into the
cause of the arrest; for Jess, although she could not make haste, never
of her own accord stood still while able to keep on walking. Maggie,
on her part, had for some time noted that they were making very slow
progress.

"She's deid cripple!" said Andrew at length, straightening his long back
from an examination of Jess's fore feet, and coming to Maggie's side of
the cart with a serious face. "I dinna believe the crater's fit to gang
ae step furder! Yet I canna see what's happent her."

Maggie was on the road before he had done speaking. Andrew tried once
to lead Jess, but immediately desisted. "It would be fell cruelty!" he
said. "We maun jist lowse her, and tak her gien we can to the How o' the
Mains. They'll gie her a nicht's quarters there, puir thing! And we'll
see gien they can tak you in as weel, Maggie. The maister, I mak nae
doobt, 'ill len' me a horse to come for ye i' the morning."

"I winna hear o' 't!" answered Maggie. "I can tramp the lave o' the ro'd
as weel's you, Andrew!"

"But I hae a' thae things to cairry, and that'll no lea' me a ban' to
help ye ower the burn!" objected Andrew.

"What o' that?" she returned. "I was sae fell tired o' sittin that my
legs are jist like to rin awa wi' me. Lat me jist dook mysel i' the
bonny win'!" she added, turning herself round and round. "--Isna it jist
like awfu' thin watter, An'rew?--Here, gie me a haud o' that loaf. I s'
cairry that, and my ain bit bundle as weel; syne, I fancy, ye can manage
the lave yersel!"

Andrew never had much to say, and this time he had nothing. But her
readiness relieved him of some anxiety; for his mother would be very
uncomfortable if he went home without her!

Maggie's spirits rose to lark-pitch as the darkness came on and
deepened; and the wind became to her a live gloom, in which, with no
eye-bound to the space enclosing her, she could go on imagining after
the freedom of her own wild will. As the world and everything in it
gradually disappeared, it grew easy to imagine Jesus making the darkness
light about him, and stepping from it plain before her sight. That
could be no trouble to him, she argued, as, being everywhere, he must be
there. He could appear in any form, who had created every shape on the
face of the whole world! If she were but fit to see him, then surely he
would come to her! For thus often had her father spoken to her, talking
of the varied appearances of the Lord after his resurrection, and his
promise that he would be with his disciples always to the end of the
world. Even after he had gone back to his father, had he not appeared to
the apostle Paul? and might it not be that he had shown himself to many
another through the long ages? In any case he was everywhere, and always
about them, although now, perhaps from lack of faith in the earth, he
had not been seen for a long time. And she remembered her father once
saying that nobody could even _think_ a thing if there was no possible
truth in it. The Lord went away that they might believe in him when out
of the sight of him, and so be in him, and he in them!

"I dinna think," said Maggie aloud to herself, as she trudged along
beside the delightfully silent Andrew, "that my father would be the
least astonished--only filled wi' an awfu' glaidness--if at ony moment,
walkin at his side, the Lord was to call him by his name, and appear
til him. He would but think he had just steppit oot upon him frae some
secret door, and would say,--'I thoucht, Lord, I would see you some day!
I was aye greedy efter a sicht o' ye, Lord, and here ye are!'"




CHAPTER V


The same moment to her ears came the cry of an infant. Her first thought
was, "Can that be Himsel, come ance again as he cam ance afore?"

She stopped in the dusky starlight, and listened with her very soul.

"Andrew!" she cried, for she heard the sound of his steps as he plodded
on in front of her, and could vaguely see him, "Andrew, what was yon?"

"I h'ard naething," answered Andrew, stopping at her cry and listening.

There came a second cry, a feeble, sad wail, and both of them heard it.

Maggie darted off in the direction whence it seemed to come; nor had she
far to run, for it was not one to reach any distance.

They were at the moment climbing a dreary, desolate ridge, where the
road was a mere stony hollow, in winter a path for the rain rather
than the feet of men. On each side of it lay a wild moor, covered
with heather and low berry-bearing shrubs. Under a big bush Maggie saw
something glimmer, and, flying to it, found a child. It might be a year
old, but was so small and poorly nourished that its age was hard to
guess. "With the instinct of a mother, she caught it up, and clasping it
close to her panting bosom, was delighted to find it cease wailing the
moment it felt her arm. Andrew, who had dropped the things he carried,
and started at once after her, met her half-way, so absorbed in her
treasure trove, and so blind to aught else, that he had to catch them
both in his arms to break the imminent shock; but she slipped from them,
and, to his amazement, went on down the hill, back the way they had
come: clearly she thought of nothing but carrying the infant home to her
father; and here even the slow perception of her companion understood
her.

"Maggie, Maggie," he cried, "ye'll baith be deid afore ye win hame wi'
't! Come on to my mither. There never was wuman like her for bairns!
She'll ken a hantle better nor ony father what to dee wi' 't!"

Maggie at once recovered her senses, and knew he was right--but not
before she had received an instantaneous insight that never after left
her: now she understood the heart of the Son of Man, come to find and
carry back the stray children to their Father and His. When afterward
she told her father what she had then felt, he answered her with just
the four words and no more--

"Lassie, ye hae 't!"

Happily the moon was now up, so that Andrew was soon able to find the
things they had both dropped in their haste, and Maggie had soon wrapped
the baby in the winsey petticoat she had been carrying. Andrew took up
his loaf and his other packages, and they set out again for Bogsheuch,
Maggie's heart all but overwhelmed with its exultation. Had the precious
thing been twice the weight, so exuberant was her feeling of wealth in
it that she could have carried it twice the distance with ease, although
the road was so rough that she went in constant terror of stumbling.
Andrew gave now and then a queer chuckle at the ludicrousness of their
home-coming, and every second minute had to stop and pick up one or
other of his many parcels; but Maggie strode on in front, full of
possession, and with the feeling of having now at last entered upon her
heavenly inheritance; so that she was quite startled when suddenly they
came in sight of the turf cottage, and the little window in which a
small cresset-lamp was burning. Before they reached it the door opened,
and Eppie appeared with an overflow of question and anxious welcome.

"What on earth--" she began.

"Naething but a bonny wee bairnie, whause mither has tint it!" at once
interrupted and answered Maggie, flying up to her, and laying the child
in her arms.

Mrs. Cormack stood and stared, now at Maggie, and now at the bundle that
lay in her own arms. Tenderly searching in the petticoat, she found at
last the little one's face, and uncovered the sleeping child.

"Eh the puir mither!" she said, and hurriedly covered again the tiny
countenance.

"It's mine!" cried Maggie. "I faund it honest!"

"Its mither may ha' lost it honest, Maggie!" said Eppie.

"Weel, its mither can come for't gien she want it! It's mine till she
dis, ony gait!" rejoined the girl.

"Nae doobt o' that!" replied the old woman, scarcely questioning that
the infant had been left to perish by some worthless tramp. "Ye'll maybe
hae't langer nor ye'll care to keep it!"

"That's no vera likly," answered Maggie with a smile, as she stood in
the doorway, in the wakeful night of the northern summer: "it's ane o'
the Lord's ain lammies 'at he cam to the hills to seek. He's fund this
ane!"

"Weel, weel, my bonnie doo, it sanna be for me to contradick ye!--But
wae's upo' me for a menseless auld wife! come in; come in: the mair
welcome 'at ye're lang expeckit!--But bless me, An'rew, what hae ye dune
wi' the cairt and the beastie?"

In a few words, for brevity was easy to him, Andrew told the story of
their disaster.

"It maun hae been the Lord's mercy! The puir beastie bude to suffer for
the sake o' the bairnie!"

She got them their supper, which was keeping hot by the fire; and then
sent Maggie to her bed in the ben-end, where she laid the baby beside
her, after washing him and wrapping him in a soft well-worn shift of
her own. But Maggie scarcely slept for listening lest the baby's breath
should stop; and Eppie sat in the kitchen with Andrew until the light,
slowly travelling round the north, deepened in the east, and at last
climbed the sky, leading up the sun himself; when Andrew rose, and set
his face toward Stonecross, in full but not very anxious expectation
of a stormy reception from his mistress before he should have time
to explain. When he reached home, however, he found the house not yet
astir; and had time to feed and groom his horses before any one was
about, so that, to his relief, no rendering of reasons was necessary.

All the next day Maggie was ill at ease, in much dread of the appearance
of a mother. The baby seemed nothing the worse for his exposure, and
although thin and pale, appeared a healthy child, taking heartily the
food offered him. He was decently though poorly clad, and very clean.
The Cormacks making inquiry at every farmhouse and cottage within range
of the moor, the tale of his finding was speedily known throughout the
neighbourhood; but to the satisfaction of Maggie at least, who fretted
to carry home her treasure, without any result; so that by the time the
period of her visit arrived, she was feeling tolerably secure in her
possession, and returned with it in triumph to her father.

The long-haired horse not yet proving equal to the journey, she had to
walk home; but Eppie herself accompanied her, bent on taking her share
in the burden of the child, which Maggie was with difficulty persuaded
to yield. Eppie indeed carried him up to the soutar's door, but Maggie
insisted on herself laying him in her father's arms. The soutar rose
from his stool, received him like Simeon taking the infant Jesus from
the arms of his mother, and held him high like a heave-offering to him
that had sent him forth from the hidden Holiest of Holies. One moment in
silence he held him, then restoring him to his daughter, sat down again,
and took up his last and shoe. Then suddenly becoming aware of a breach
in his manners, he rose again at once, saying--

"I crave yer pardon, Mistress Cormack: I was clean forgettin ony breedin
I ever had!--Maggie, tak oor freen ben the hoose, and gar her rest her
a bit, while ye get something for her efter her lang walk. I'll be ben
mysel' in a meenute or twa to hae a crack wi' her. I hae but a feow
stitches mair to put intil this same sole! The three o' 's maun tak some
sarious coonsel thegither anent the upbringin o' this God-sent bairn!
I doobtna but he's come wi' a blessin to this hoose! Eh, but it was a
mercifu fittin o' things that the puir bairn and Maggie sud that nicht
come thegither! Verily, He shall give his angels chairge over thee! They
maun hae been aboot the muir a' that day, that nane but Maggie sud get
a haud o' 'im--aiven as they maun hae been aboot the field and the flock
and the shepherds and the inn-stable a' that gran' nicht!"

The same moment entered a neighbour who, having previously heard and
misinterpreted the story, had now caught sight of their arrival.

"Eh, soutar, but ye _ir_ a man by Providence sair oppressed!" she cried.
"Wha think ye's been i' the faut here?"

The wrath of the soutar sprang up flaming.

"Gang oot o' my hoose, ye ill-thouchtit wuman!" he shouted. "Gang oot
o' 't this verra meenit--and comena intil 't again 'cep it be to beg my
pardon and that o' this gude wuman and my bonny lass here! The Lord God
bless her frae ill tongues!--Gang oot, I tell ye!"

The outraged father stood towering, whom all the town knew for a man of
gentlest temper and great courtesy. The woman stood one moment dazed and
uncertain, then turned and fled. Maggie retired with Mistress Cormack;
and when the soutar joined them, he said never a word about the
discomfited gossip. Eppie having taken her tea, rose and bade them
good-night, nor crossed another threshold in the village.




CHAPTER VI


As soon as the baby was asleep, Maggie went back to the kitchen where
her father still sat at work.

"Ye're late the night, father!" she said.

"I am that, lassie; but ye see I canna luik for muckle help frae you for
some time: ye'll hae eneuch to dee wi' that bairn o' yours; and we hae
him to fen for noo as weel's oorsels! No 'at I hae the least concern
aboot the bonny white raven, only we maun consider _him_ like the lave!"
"It's little he'll want for a whilie, father!" answered Maggie. "--But
noo," she went on, in a tone of seriousness that was almost awe, "lat me
hear what ye're thinkin:--what kin' o' a mither could she be that left
her bairn theroot i' the wide, eerie nicht? and what for could she hae
dene 't?"

"She maun hae been some puir lassie that hadna learnt to think first
o' His wull! She had believt the man whan he promised to merry her, no
kennin he was a leear, and no heedin the v'ice inside her that said _ye
maunna_; and sae she loot him dee what he likit wi' her, and mak himsel
the father o' a bairnie that wasna meant for him. Sic leeberties as he
took wi' her, and she ouchtna to hae permittit, made a mither o' her
afore ever she was merried. Sic fules hae an awfu' time o' 't; for fowk
hardly ever forgies them, and aye luiks doon upo' them. Doobtless the
rascal ran awa and left her to fen for hersel; naebody would help her;
and she had to beg the breid for hersel, and the drap milk for the
bairnie; sae that at last she lost hert and left it, jist as Hagar left
hers aneath the buss i' the wilderness afore God shawed her the bonny
wall o' watter."

"I kenna whilk o' them was the warst--father or mither!" cried Maggie.

"Nae mair do I!" said the soutar; "but I doobt the ane that lee'd to the
ither, maun hae to be coontit the warst!"

"There canna be mony sic men!" said Maggie.

"'Deed there's a heap o' them no a hair better!" rejoined her father;
"but wae's me for the puir lassie that believes them!"

"She kenned what was richt a' the time, father!"

"That's true, my dauty; but to ken is no aye to un'erstan'; and even to
un'erstan' is no aye to see richt intil't! No wuman's safe that hasna
the love o' God, the great Love, in her hert a' the time! What's best in
her, whan the vera best's awa, may turn to be her greatest danger. And
the higher ye rise ye come into the waur danger, till ance ye're fairly
intil the ae safe place, the hert o' the Father. There, and there only,
ye're safe!--safe frae earth, frae hell, and frae yer ain hert! A' the
temptations, even sic as ance made the haivenly hosts themsels fa' frae
haiven to hell, canna touch ye there! But whan man or wuman repents and
heumbles himsel, there is He to lift them up, and that higher than ever
they stede afore!"

"Syne they're no to be despised that fa'!"

"Nane despises them, lassie, but them that haena yet learnt the danger
they're in o' that same fa' themsels. Mony ane, I'm thinking, is keepit
frae fa'in, jist because she's no far eneuch on to get the guid o' the
shame, but would jist sink farther and farther!"

"But Eppie tells me that maist o' them 'at trips gangs on fa'in, and
never wins up again."

"Ou, ay; that's true as far as we, short-lived and short-sichtit
craturs, see o' them! but this warl's but the beginnin; and the glory
o' Christ, wha's the vera Love o' the Father, spreads a heap further nor
that. It's no for naething we're tellt hoo the sinner-women cam til him
frae a' sides! They needit him sair, and cam. Never ane o' them was
ower black to be latten gang close up til him; and some o' sic women
un'erstede things he said 'at mony a respectable wuman cudna get a glimp
o'! There's aye rain eneuch, as Maister Shaksper says, i' the sweet
haivens to wash the vera han' o' murder as white as snow. The creatin
hert is fu' o' sic rain. Loe _him_, lassie, and ye'll never glaur the
bonny goon ye broucht white frae his hert!"

The soutar's face was solemn and white, and tears were running down the
furrows of his cheeks. Maggie too was weeping. At length she said--

"Supposin the mither o' my bairnie a wuman like that, can ye think it
fair that _her_ disgrace should stick til _him?_"

"It sticks til him only in sic minds as never saw the lovely greatness
o' God."

"But sic bairns come na intil the warl as God wad hae them come!"

"But your bairnie _is_ come, and that he couldna withoot the creatin
wull o' the Father! Doobtless sic bairnies hae to suffer frae the prood
jeedgment o' their fellow-men and women, but they may get muckle guid
and little ill frae that--a guid naebody can reive them o'. It's no
a mere veesitin o' the sins o' the fathers upo' the bairns, but a
provision to haud the bairns aff o' the like, and to shame the fathers
o' them. Eh, but sic maun be sair affrontit wi' themsels, that disgrace
at ance the wife that should hae been and the bairn that shouldna! Eh,
the puir bairnie that has sic a father! But he has anither as weel--a
richt gran' father to rin til!--The ae thing," the soutar went on, "that
you and me, Maggie, has to do, is never to lat the bairn ken the miss o'
father or mother, and sae lead him to the ae Father, the only real and
true ane.--There he's wailin, the bonny wee man!"

Maggie ran to quiet her little one, but soon returned, and sitting down
again beside her father, asked him for a piece of work.

All this time, through his own cowardly indifference, the would-be-grand
preacher, James Blatherwick, knew nothing of the fact that, somewhere in
the world, without father or mother, lived a silent witness against him.




CHAPTER VII


Isy had contrived to postpone her return to her aunt until James was
gone; for she dreaded being in the house with him lest anything should
lead to the discovery of the relation between them. Soon after his
departure, however, she had to encounter the appalling fact that the
dread moment was on its way when she would no longer be able to conceal
the change in her condition. Her first and last thought was then, how
to protect the good name of her lover, and avoid involving him in the
approaching ruin of her reputation. With this in view she vowed to God
and to her own soul absolute silence with regard to the past: James's
name even should never pass her lips! Nor did she find the vow hard to
keep, even when her aunt took measures to draw her secret from her; but
the dread lest in her pains she should cry out for the comfort which
James alone could give her, almost drove her to poison, from which only
the thought of his coming child restrained her. Enabled at length only
by the pure inexorability of her hour, she passed through her sorrow and
found herself still alive, with her lips locked tight on her secret.
The poor girl who was weak enough to imperil her good name for love of
a worthless man, was by that love made strong to shield him from the
consequences of her weakness. Whether in this she did well for the
world, for the truth, or for her own soul, she never wasted a thought.
In vain did her aunt ply her with questions; she felt that to answer one
of them would be to wrong him, and lose her last righteous hold upon the
man who had at least once loved her a little. Without a gleam, without
even a shadow of hope for herself, she clung, through shame and blame,
to his scathlessness as the only joy left her. He had most likely, she
thought, all but forgotten her very existence, for he had never written
to her, or made any effort to discover what had become of her. She clung
to the conviction that he could never have heard of what had befallen
her.

By and by she grew able to reflect that to remain where she was would be
the ruin of her aunt; for who would lodge in the same house with _her_?
She must go at once! and her longing to go, with the impossibility
of even thinking where she could go, brought her to the very verge of
despair, and it was only the thought of her child that still gave her
strength enough to live on. And to add immeasurably to her misery, she
was now suddenly possessed by the idea, which for a long time remained
immovably fixed, that, agonizing as had been her effort after silence,
she had failed in her resolve, and broken the promise she imagined
she had given to James; that she had been false to him, brought him to
shame, and for ever ruined his prospects; that she had betrayed him into
the power of her aunt, and through her to the authorities of the church!
That was why she had never heard a word from him, she thought, and she
was never to see him any more! The conviction, the seeming consciousness
of all this, so grew upon her that, one morning, when her infant was
not yet a month old, she crept from the house, and wandered out into the
world, with just one shilling in a purse forgotten in the pocket of
her dress. After that, for a time, her memory lost hold of her
consciousness, and what befel her remained a blank, refusing to be
recalled.

When she began to come to herself she had no knowledge of where she had
been, or for how long her mind had been astray; all was irretrievable
confusion, crossed with cloud-like trails of blotted dreams, and vague
survivals of gratitude for bread and pieces of money. Everything she
became aware of surprised her, except the child in her arms. Her story
had been plain to every one she met, and she had received thousands of
kindnesses which her memory could not hold. At length, intentionally or
not, she found herself in a neighbourhood to which she had heard James
Blatherwick refer.

Here again a dead blank stopped her backward gaze--till suddenly once
more she grew aware, and knew that she was aware, of being alone on a
wide moor in a dim night, with her hungry child, to whom she had given
the last drop of nourishment he could draw from her, wailing in her
arms. Then fell upon her a hideous despair, and unable to carry him a
step farther, she dropped him from her helpless hands into a bush, and
there left him, to find, as she thought, some milk for him. She could
sometimes even remember that she went staggering about, looking under
the great stones, and into the clumps of heather, in the hope of finding
something for him to drink. At last, I presume, she sank on the ground,
and lay for a time insensible; anyhow, when she came to herself, she
searched in vain for the child, or even the place where she had left
him.

The same evening it was that Maggie came along with Andrew, and found
the baby as I have already told. All that night, and a great part of the
next day, Isy went searching about in vain, doubtless with intervals of
repose compelled by utter exhaustion. Imagining at length that she had
discovered the very spot where she left him, and not finding him, she
came to the conclusion that some wild beast had come upon the helpless
thing and carried him off. Then a gleam of water coming to her eye, she
rushed to the peat-hag whence it was reflected, and would there have
drowned herself. But she was intercepted and turned aside by a man who
threw down his flauchter-spade, and ran between her and the frightful
hole. He thought she was out of her mind, and tried to console her with
the assurance that no child left on that moor could be in other than
luck's way. He gave her a few half-pence, and directed her to the next
town, with a threat of hanging if she made a second attempt of the
sort. A long time of wandering followed, with ceaseless inquiry,
and alternating disappointment and fresh expectation; but every day
something occurred that served just to keep the life in her, and at last
she reached the county-town, where she was taken to a place of shelter.




CHAPTER VIII


James Blatherwick was proving himself not unacceptable to his native
parish, where he was thought a very rising man, inasmuch as his fluency
was far ahead of his perspicuity. He soon came to note the soutar as a
man far in advance of the rest of his parishioners; but he saw, at the
same time, that he was regarded by most as a wild fanatic if not as
a dangerous heretic; and himself imagined that he saw in him certain
indications of a mild lunacy.

In Tiltowie he pursued the same course as elsewhere: anxious to let
nothing come between him and the success of his eloquence, he avoided
any appearance of differing in doctrine from his congregation; and until
he should be more firmly established, would show himself as much as
possible of the same mind with them, using the doctrinal phrases he had
been accustomed to in his youth, or others so like that they would be
taken to indicate unchanged opinions, while for his part he practised a
mental reservation in regard to them.

He had noted with some degree of pleasure in the soutar, that he used
almost none of the set phrases of the good people of the village, who
devoutly followed the traditions of the elders; but he knew little as to
what the soutar did not believe, and still less of what he did believe
with all his heart and soul; for John MacLear could not even utter the
name of God without therein making a confession of faith immeasurably
beyond anything inhabiting the consciousness of the parson; and on his
part soon began to note in James a total absence of enthusiasm in regard
to such things of which his very calling implied at least an absolute
acceptance: he would allude to any or all of them as merest matters of
course! Never did his face light up when he spoke of the Son of God,
of his death, or of his resurrection; never did he make mention of the
kingdom of heaven as if it were anything more venerable than the kingdom
of Great Britain and Ireland.

But the soul of the soutar would venture far into the twilight,
searching after the things of God, opening wider its eyes, as the
darkness widened around them. On one occasion the parson took upon him
to remonstrate with what seemed to him the audacity of his parishioner:

"Don't you think you are just going a little too far there, Mr.
MacLear?" he said.

"Ye mean ower far intil the dark, Mr. Blatherwick?"

"Yes, that is what I mean. You speculate too boldly."

"But dinna ye think, sir, that that direction it's plain the dark grows
a wee thinner, though I grant ye there's nothing yet to ca' licht? Licht
we may aye ken by its ain fair shinin, and by noucht else!"

"But the human soul is just as apt to deceive itself as the human
eye! It is always ready to take a flash inside itself for something
objective!" said Blatherwick.

"Nae doobt! nae doobt! but whan the true licht comes, ye aye ken the
differ! A man _may_ tak the dark for licht, but he canna take the licht
for darkness!"

"And there must always be something for the light to shine upon, else
the man sees nothing!" said the parson.

"There's thoucht, and possible insicht intil the man!" said the soutar
to himself.--"Maybe, like the Ephesians, ye haena yet fund oot gien
there be ony Holy Ghost, sir?" he said to him aloud.

"No man dares deny that!" answered the minister.

"Still a man mayna _ken't_, though he daursna deny't! Nane but them 'at
follows whaur he leads, can ken that he verily is."

"We must beware of private interpretation!" suggested James.

"Gien a man hearsna a word spoken til his ain sel', he has na the word
to lippen til! The Scriptur is to him but a sealed buik; he walks i' the
dark. The licht is neither pairtit nor gethered. Gien a man has licht,
he has nane the less that there's twa or three o' them thegither
present.--Gien there be twa or three prayin thegither, ilk ane o' the
three has jist what he's able to receive, and he kens 't in himsel as
licht; and the fourth may hae nane. Gien it comena to ilk ane o' them,
it comesna to a'. Ilk ane maun hae the revelation intil his ain sel', as
gien there wasna ane mair. And gien it be sae, hoo are we to win at ony
trouth no yet revealed, 'cep we gang oot intil the dark to meet it? Ye
maun caw canny, I admit, i' the mirk; but ye maun caw gien ye wad win at
onything!"

"But suppose you know enough to keep going, and do not care to venture
into the dark?"

"Gien a man hauds on practeesin what he kens, the hunger 'ill wauk in
him efter something mair. I'm thinkin the angels had lang to desire
afore they could luik intil certain things they sair wantit; but ye may
be sure they warna left withoot as muckle licht as would lead honest
fowk safe on!"

"But suppose they couldn't tell whether what they seemed to see was true
light or not?"

"Syne they would hae to fa' back upo the wull o' the great Licht: we ken
weel he wants us a' to see as he himsel sees! Gien we seek that Licht,
we'll get it; gien we carena for't, we're jist naething and naegait, and
are in sore need o' some sharp discipleen."

"I'm afraid I can't follow you quite. The fact is, I have been so long
occupied with the Bible history, and the new discoveries that bear
testimony to it, that I have had but little time for metaphysics."

"And what's the guid o' history, or sic metapheesics as is the vera sowl
o' history, but to help ye to see Christ? and what's the guid o' seein
Christ but sae to see God wi' hert and un'erstan'in baith as to ken that
yer seein him? Ye min' hoo the Lord said nane could ken the Father but
the man to whom the Son revealt him? Sir, it's fell time ye had a glimp
o' that! Ye ken naething till ye ken God--the only ane a man can truly
and railly ken!"

"Well, you're a long way ahead of me, and for the present I'm afraid
there's nothing left but to say good-night to you!"

And therewith the minister departed.

"Lord," said the soutar, as he sat guiding his awl through sole and welt
and upper of the shoe on his last, "there's surely something at work i'
the yoong man! Surely he canna be that far frae waukin up to see and ken
that he sees and kens naething! Lord, pu' doon the dyke o' learnin and
self-richteousness that he canna see ower the tap o', and lat him see
thee upo' the ither side o' 't. Lord, sen' him the grace o' oppen e'en
to see whaur and what he is, that he may cry oot wi' the lave o' 's,
puir blin' bodies, to them that winna see. 'Wauk, thoo that sleepest,
and come oot o' thy grave, and see the licht o' the Father i' the face
o' the Son.'"

But the minister went away intent on classifying the soutar by finding
out with what sect of the middle-age mystics to place him. At the same
time something strange seemed to hover about the man, refusing to be
handled in that way. Something which he called his own religious sense
appeared to know something of what the soutar must mean, though he could
neither isolate nor define it.

Faithlessly as he had behaved to Isy, Blatherwick was not consciously,
that is with purpose or intent, a deceitful man. He had, on the
contrary, always cherished a strong faith in his own honour. But faith
in a thing, in an idea, in a notion, is no proof, or even sign that the
thing actually exists: in the present case it had no root except in
the man's thought of himself, in his presentation to himself of his own
reflected self. The man who thought so much of his honour was in truth a
moral unreality, a cowardly fellow, a sneak who, in the hope of escaping
consequences, carried himself as beyond reproof. How should such a one
ever have the power of spiritual vision developed in him? How should
such a one ever see God--ever exist in the same region in which the
soutar had long taken up his abode? Still there was this much reality
in him, and he had made this much progress that, holding fast by his
resolve henceforward no more to slide, he was aware also of a dim
suspicion of something he had not seen, but which he might become able
to see; and was half resolved to think and read, for the future, with
the intent to find out what this strange man seemed to know, or thought
he knew.

Soon finding himself unable, however, try as hard as he might, to be
sure of anything, he became weary of the effort, and sank back into the
old, self-satisfied, blind sleep.




CHAPTER IX


Out of this quiescence, however, a pang from the past one morning
suddenly waked him, and almost without consciousness of a volition, he
found himself at the soutar's door. Maggie opened it with the baby in
her arms, with whom she had just been having a game. Her face was in a
glow, her hair tossed about, and her dark eyes flashing with excitement.
To Blatherwick, without any great natural interest in life, and in the
net of a haunting trouble which caused him no immediate apprehension,
the young girl, of so little account in the world, and so far below him
as he thought, affected him as beautiful; and, indeed, she was far more
beautiful than he was able to appreciate. It must be remembered too,
that it was not long since he had been refused by another; and at such
a time a man is readier to fall in love afresh. Trouble then, lack of
interest, and late repulse, had laid James's heart, such as it was, open
to assault from a new quarter whence he foresaw no danger.

"That's a very fine baby you have!" he said. "Whose is he?"

"Mine, sir," answered Maggie, with some triumph, for she thought every
one must know the story of her treasure.

"Oh, indeed; I did not know!" answered the parson, bewildered.

"At least," Maggie resumed a little hurriedly, "I have the best right to
him!" and there stopped.

"She cannot possibly be his mother!" thought the minister, and resolved
to question his housekeeper about the child.

"Is your father in the house?" he asked, and without waiting for an
answer, went in. "Such a big boy is too heavy for you to carry!" he
added, as he laid his hand on the latch of the kitchen door.

"No ae bit!" rejoined Maggie, with a little contempt at his
disparagement of her strength. "And wha's to cairry him but me?"

Huddling the boy to her bosom, she went on talking to him in childish
guise, as she lifted the latch for the minister:--

"Wad he hae my pet gang traivellin the warl' upo thae twa bonny wee legs
o' his ain, wantin the wings he left ahint him? Na, na! they maun grow a
heap stronger first. His ain mammie wad cairry him gien he war twice the
size! Noo, we s' gang but the hoose and see daddy."

She bore him after the minister, and sat down with him on her own stool,
beside her father, who looked up, with his hands and knees in skilful
consort of labour.

"Weel, minister, hoo are ye the day? Is the yerd ony lichter upo' the
tap o' ye?" he said, with a smile that was almost pauky.

"I do not understand you, Mr. MacLear!" answered James with dignity.

"Na, ye canna! Gien ye could, ye wouldna be sae comfortable as ye seem!"

"I cannot think, Mr. MacLear, why you should be rude to me!"

"Gien ye saw the hoose on fire aboot a man deid asleep, maybe ye micht
be in ower great a hurry to be polite til 'im!" remarked the soutar.

"Dare you suggest, sir, that I have been drinking?" cried the parson.

"Not for a single moment, sir; and I beg yer pardon for causin ye so to
mistak me: I do not believe, sir, ye war ever ance owertaen wi' drink in
a' yer life! I fear I'm jist ower ready to speyk in parables, for it's
no a'body that can or wull un'erstan' them! But the last time ye left me
upo' this same stule, it was wi' that cry o' the Apostle o' the Gentiles
i' my lug--'Wauk up, thoo that sleepest!' For even the deid wauk whan
the trumpet blatters i' their lug!"

"It seems to me that there the Apostle makes allusion to the condition
of the Gentile nations, asleep in their sins! But it may apply,
doubtless, to the conversion of any unbelieving man from the error of
his ways."

"Weel," said the soutar, turning half round, and looking the minister
full in the face, "are _ye_ convertit, sir? Or are ye but turnin frae
side to side i' yer coffin--seekin a sleepin assurance that ye're
waukin?"

"You are plain-spoken anyway!" said the minister, rising.

"Maybe I am at last, sir! And maybe I hae been ower lang in comin
to that same plainness! Maybe I was ower feart for yer coontin me
ill-fashiont--what ye ca' _rude!_"

The parson was half-way to the door, for he was angry, which was not
surprising. But with the latch in his hand he turned, and, lo, there in
the middle of the floor, with the child in her arms, stood the beautiful
Maggie, as if in act to follow him: both were staring after him.

"Dinna anger him, father," said Maggie; "he disna ken better!"

"Weel ken I, my dautie, that he disna ken better; but I canna help
thinkin he's maybe no that far frae the waukin. God grant I be richt
aboot that! Eh, gien he wud but wauk up, what a man he would mak! He
kens a heap--only what's that whaur a man has no licht?"

"I certainly do not see things as you would have me believe you see
them; and you are hardly capable of persuading me that you do, I fear!"
said Blatherwick, with the angry flush again on his face, which had for
a moment been dispelled by pallor.

But here the baby seeming to recognize the unsympathetic tone of the
conversation, pulled down his lovely little mouth, and sent from it a
dread and potent cry. Clasping him to her bosom, Maggie ran from the
room with him, jostling James in the doorway as he let her pass.

"I am afraid I frightened the little man!" he said.

"'Deed, sir, it may ha' been you, or it may ha' been me 'at frichtit
him," rejoined the soutar. "It's a thing I'm sair to blame in--that,
whan I'm in richt earnest, I'm aye ready to speyk as gien I was angert.
Sir, I humbly beg yer pardon."

"As humbly I beg yours," returned the parson; "I was in the wrong."

The heart of the old man was drawn afresh to the youth. He laid aside
his shoe, and turning on his stool, took James's hand in both of his,
and said solemnly and lovingly--

"This moment I wad wullin'ly die, sir, that the licht o' that uprisin o'
which we spak micht brak throuw upon ye!"

"I believe you, sir," answered James; "but," he went on, with an attempt
at humour, "it wouldn't be so much for you to do after all, seeing you
would straightway find yourself in a much better place!"

"Maybe whaur the penitent thief sat, some auchteen hunner year ago,
waitin to be called up higher!" rejoined the soutar with a watery smile.

The parson opened the door, and went home--where his knees at once found
their way to the carpet.

From that night Blatherwick began to go often to the soutar's, and soon
went almost every other day, for at least a few minutes; and on such
occasions had generally a short interview with Maggie and the baby, in
both of whom, having heard from the soutar the story of the child, he
took a growing interest.

"You seem to love him as if he were your own, Maggie!" he said one
morning to the girl.

"And isna he my ain? Didna God himsel gie me the bairn intil my vera
airms--or a' but?" she rejoined.

"Suppose he were to die!" suggested the minister. "Such children often
do!"

"I needna think aboot that," she answered. "I would just hae to say,
as mony ane has had to say afore me: 'The Lord gave,'--ye ken the rest,
sir!"

But day by day Maggie grew more beautiful in the minister's eyes, until
at last he was not only ready to say that he loved her, but for her sake
to disregard worldly and ambitious considerations.




CHAPTER X


On the morning of a certain Saturday, therefore, which day of the week
he always made a holiday, he resolved to let her know without further
delay that he loved her; and the rather that on the next day he was
engaged to preach for a brother clergyman at Deemouth, and felt that,
his fate with Maggie unknown, his mind would not be cool enough for him
to do well in the pulpit. But neither disappointment nor a fresh love
had yet served to set him free from his old vanity or arrogance: he
regarded his approaching declaration as about to confer great honour
as well as favour upon the damsel of low estate, about to be invited
to share in his growing distinction. In his late disappointment he had
asked a lady to descend a little from her social pedestal, in the belief
that he offered her a greater than proportionate counter-elevation; and
now in his suit to Maggie he was almost unable to conceive a possibility
of failure. When she would have shown him into the kitchen, he took
her by the arm, and leading her to the _ben-end_, at once began his
concocted speech. Scarcely had she gathered his meaning, however, when
he was checked by her startled look.

"And what wad ye hae me dee wi' my bairn?" she asked instantly, without
sign of perplexity, smiling on the little one as at some absurdity in
her arms rather than suggested to her mind.

But the minister was sufficiently in love to disregard the unexpected
indication. His pride was indeed a little hurt, but he resisted any show
of offence, reflecting that her anxiety was not altogether an unnatural
one.

"Oh, we shall easily find some experienced mother," he answered, "who
will understand better than you even how to take care of him!"

"Na, na!" she rejoined. "I hae baith a father and a wean to luik efter;
and that's aboot as muckle as I'll ever be up til!"

So saying, she rose and carried the little one up to the room her father
now occupied, nor cast a single glance in the direction of her would-be
lover.

Now at last he was astonished. Could it mean that she had not understood
him? It could not be that she did not appreciate his offer! Her devotion
to the child was indeed absurdly engrossing, but that would soon come
right! He could have no fear of such a rivalry, however unpleasant at
the moment! That little vagrant to come between him and the girl he
would make his wife!

He glanced round him: the room looked very empty! He heard her
oft-interrupted step through the thin floor: she was lavishing caresses
on the senseless little animal! He caught up his hat, and with a flushed
face went straight to the soutar where he sat at work.

"I have come to ask you, Mr. MacLear, if you will give me your daughter
to be my wife!" he said.

"Ow, sae that's it!" returned the soutar, without raising his eyes.

"You have no objection, I hope?" continued the minister, finding him
silent.

"What says she hersel? Ye comena to me first, I reckon!"

"She said, or implied at least, that she could not leave the child. But
she cannot mean that!"

"And what for no?--There's nae need for me to objeck!"

"But I shall soon persuade her to withdraw that objection!"

"Then I should _hae_ objections--mair nor ane--to put to the fore!"

"You surprise me! Is not a woman to leave father and mother and cleave
to her husband?"

"Ow ay--sae be the woman is his wife! Than lat nane sun'er them!--But
there's anither sayin, sir, that I doobt may hae something to dee wi'
Maggie's answer!"

"And what, pray, may that be?"

"That man or woman must leave father and mother, wife and child, for the
sake o' the Son o' Man."

"You surely are not papist enough to think that means a minister is not
to marry?"

"Not at all, sir; but I doobt that's what it'll come til atween you and
Maggie!"

"You mean that she will not marry?"

"I mean that she winna merry _you_, sir."

"But just think how much more she could do for Christ as the minister's
wife!"

"I'm 'maist convinced she wad coont merryin you as tantamount to refusin
to lea' a' for the Son o' Man."

"Why should she think that?"

"Because, sae far as I see, she canna think that _ye_ hae left a' for
_him_."

"Ah, that is what you have been teaching her! She does not say that of
herself! You have not left her free to choose!"

"The queston never came up atween's. She's perfecly free to tak her ain
gait--and she kens she is!--Ye dinna seem to think it possible she
sud tak _his_ wull raither nor yours!--that the love o' Christ should
constrain her ayont the love offert her by Jeames Bletherwick!--We _hae_
conversed aboot ye, sir, but niver differt!"

"But allowing us--you and me--to be of different opinions on some
points, must that be a reason why she and I should not love one
another?"

"No reason whatever, sir--if ye can and do: _that_ point would be
already settlet. But ye winna get Maggie to merry ye sae long as she
disna believe ye loe her Lord as well as she loes him hersel. It's no
a common love that Maggie beirs to her Lord; and gien ye loed her wi' a
luve worthy o' her, ye would see that!"

"Then you will promise me not to interfere?"

"I'll promise ye naething, sir, excep to do my duty by her--sae far as
I understan' what that duty is. Gien I thoucht--which the God o' my life
forbid!--that Maggie didna lo'e him as weel at least as I lo'e him, I
would gang upo' my auld knees til her, to entreat her to loe him wi' a'
her heart and sowl and stren'th and min';--and whan I had done that, she
micht merry wha she wad--hangman or minister: no a word would I say!
For trouble she maun hae, and trouble she wull get--I thank my God, who
giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not!"

"Then I am free to do my best to win her?"

"Ye are, sir; and mair--afore the morn's mornin, I winna pass a word wi'
her upo the subjeck."

"Thank you, sir," returned the minister, and took his leave.

"A fine lad! a fine lad!" said the soutar aloud to himself, as
he resumed the work for a moment interrupted,"--but no clear--no
crystal-clear--no clear like the Son o' Man!"

He looked up, and saw his daughter in the doorway.

"No a word, lassie!" he cried. "I'm no for ye this meenute.--No a word
to me aboot onything or onybody the day, but what's absolute necessar!"

"As ye wull! father," rejoined Maggie.--"I'm gaein oot to seek auld
Eppy; she was intil the baker's shop a meenute ago!--The bairnie's
asleep."

"Vera weel! Gien I hear him, I s' atten' til 'im," answered the soutar.

"Thank ye, father," returned Maggie, and left the house.

But the minister, having to start that same afternoon for Deemouth, and
feeling it impossible, things remaining as they were, to preach at his
ease, had been watching the soutar's door: he saw it open and Maggie
appear. For a moment he flattered himself she was coming to look for
him, in order to tell him how sorry she was for her late behaviour to
him. But her start when first she became aware of his presence, did not
fail, notwithstanding his conceit, to satisfy him that such was not her
intent. He made haste to explain his presence.

"I've been waiting all this time on the chance of seeing you, Margaret!"
he said. "I am starting within an hour or so for Deemouth, but could not
bear to go without telling you that your father has no objection to my
saying to you what I please. He means to have a talk with you to-morrow
morning, and as I cannot possibly get back from Deemouth before Monday,
I must now express the hope that he will not succeed in persuading you
to doubt the reality of my love. I admire your father more than I can
tell you, but he seems to hold the affections God has given us of small
account compared with his judgment of the strength and reality of them."

"Did he no tell ye I was free to do or say what I liked?" rejoined
Maggie rather sharply.

"Yes; he did say something to that effect."

"Then, for mysel, and i' the name o' my father, I tell ye, Maister
Bletherwick, I dinna care to see ye again."

"Do you mean what you say, Margaret?" rejoined the minister, in a voice
that betrayed not a little genuine emotion.

"I do mean it," she answered.

"Not if I tell you that I am both ready and willing to take the child
and bring him up as my own?"

"He wouldna _be_ yer ain!"

"Quite as much as yours!"

"Hardly," she returned, with a curious little laugh. "But, as I daur say
my father tellt ye, I canna believe ye lo'e God wi' a' yer hert."

"Dare you say that for yourself, Margaret?"

"No; but I do want to love God wi' my whole hert. Mr. Bletherwick, are
ye a rael Christian? Or are ye sure ye're no a hypocreet? I wad like to
ken. But I dinna believe ye ken yersel!"

"Well, perhaps I do not. But I see there is no occasion to say more!"

"Na, nane," answered Maggie.

He lifted his hat, and turned away to the coach-office.




CHAPTER XI


It would be difficult to represent the condition of mind in which
Blatherwick sat on the box-seat of the Defiance coach that evening,
behind four gray thorough-breds, carrying him at the rate of ten miles
an hour towards Deemouth. Hurt pride, indignation, and a certain mild
revenge in contemplating Maggie's disappointment when at length she
should become aware of the distinction he had gained and she had lost,
were its main components. He never noted a feature of the rather tame
scenery that went hurrying past him, and yet the time did not seem to go
slowly, for he was astonished when the coach stopped, and he found his
journey at an end.

He got down rather cramped and stiff, and, as it was still early,
started for a stroll about the streets to stretch his legs, and see what
was going on, glad that he had not to preach in the morning, and would
have all the afternoon to go over his sermon once more in that dreary
memory of his. The streets were brilliant with gas, for Saturday was
always a sort of market-night, and at that moment they were crowded with
girls going merrily home from the paper-mill at the close of the week's
labour. To Blatherwick, who had very little sympathy with gladness of
any sort, the sight only called up by contrast the very different scene
on which his eyes would look down the next evening from the vantage
coigne of the pulpit, in a church filled with an eminently respectable
congregation--to which he would be setting forth the results of certain
late geographical discoveries and local identifications, not knowing
that already even later discoveries had rendered all he was about to say
more than doubtful.

But while, sunk in a not very profound reverie, he was in the act of
turning the corner of a narrow wynd, he was all but knocked down by
a girl whom another in the crowd had pushed violently against him.
Recoiling from the impact, and unable to recover her equilibrium, she
fell helplessly prostrate on the granite pavement, and lay motionless.
Annoyed and half-angry, he was on the point of walking on, heedless
of the accident, when something in the pale face among the coarse and
shapeless shoes that had already gathered thick around it, arrested him
with a strong suggestion of some one he had once known. But the same
moment the crowd hid her from his view; and, shocked even to be reminded
of Isy in such an assemblage, he turned resolutely away, and cherishing
the thought of the many chances against its being she, walked steadily
on. When he looked round again ere crossing the street, the crowd had
vanished, the pavement was nearly empty, and a policeman who just then
came up, had seen nothing of the occurrence, remarking only that the
girls at the paper-mills were a rough lot.

A moment more and his mind was busy with a passage in his sermon which
seemed about to escape his memory: it was still as impossible for him to
talk freely about the things a minister is supposed to love best, as
it had been when he began to preach. It was not, certainly, out of the
fulness of the heart that _his_ mouth ever spoke!

He sought the house of Mr. Robertson, the friend he had come to assist,
had supper with him and his wife, and retired early. In the morning he
went to his friend's church, in the afternoon rehearsed his sermon to
himself, and when the evening came, climbed the pulpit-stair, and soon
appeared engrossed in its rites. But as he seemed to be pouring out his
soul in the long extempore prayer, he suddenly opened his eyes as
if unconsciously compelled, and that moment saw, in the front of the
gallery before him, a face he could not doubt to be that of Isy. Her
gaze was fixed upon him; he saw her shiver, and knew that she saw and
recognized him. He felt himself grow blind. His head swam, and he felt
as if some material force was bending down his body sideways from her.
Such, nevertheless, was his self-possession, that he reclosed his eyes,
and went on with his prayer--if that could in any sense be prayer where
he knew neither word he uttered, thing he thought, nor feeling that
moved him. With Claudius in _Hamlet_ he might have said,

   My words fly up, my thoughts remain below:
   Words without thoughts never to heaven go!

But while yet speaking, and holding his eyes fast that he might not
see her again, his consciousness all at once returned--it seemed to him
through a mighty effort of the will, and upon that he immediately began
to pride himself. Instantly there-upon he was aware of his thoughts and
words, and knew himself able to control his actions and speech. All
the while, however, that he conducted the rest of the "service," he was
constantly aware, although he did not again look at her, of the figure
of Isy before him, with its gaze fixed motionless upon him, and began at
last to wonder vaguely whether she might not be dead, and come back from
the grave to his mind a mysterious thought-spectre. But at the close of
the sermon, when the people stood up to sing, she rose with them; and
the half-dazed preacher sat down, exhausted with emotion, conflict, and
effort at self-command. When he rose once more for the benediction,
she was gone; and yet again he took refuge in the doubt whether she had
indeed been present at all.

When Mrs. Robertson had retired, and James was sitting with his host
over their tumbler of toddy, a knock came to the door. Mr. Robertson
went to open it, and James's heart sank within him. But in a moment his
host returned, saying it was a policeman to let him know that a woman
was lying drunk at the bottom of his doorsteps, and to inquire what he
wished done with her.

"I told him," said Mr. Robertson, "to take the poor creature to the
station, and in the morning I would see her. When she's ill the next
day, you see," he added, "I may have a sort of chance with her; but it
is seldom of any use."

A horrible suspicion that it was Isy herself had seized on Blatherwick;
and for a moment he was half inclined to follow the men to the station;
but his friend would be sure to go with him, and what might not come of
it! Seeing that she had kept silent so long, however, it seemed to him
more than probable that she had lost all care about him, and if let
alone would say nothing. Thus he reasoned, lost in his selfishness, and
shrinking from the thought of looking the disreputable creature in the
eyes. Yet the awful consciousness haunted him that, if she had fallen
into drunken habits and possibly worse, it was his fault, and the ruin
of the once lovely creature lay at his door, and his alone.

He made haste to his room, and to bed, where for a long while he
lay unable even to think. Then all at once, with gathered force, the
frightful reality, the keen, bare truth broke upon him like a huge, cold
wave; he had a clear vision of his guilt, and the vision was
conscious of itself as _his_ guilt; he saw it rounded in a gray fog of
life-chilling dismay. What was he but a troth-breaker, a liar--and that
in strong fact, not in feeble tongue? "What am I," said Conscience, "but
a cruel, self-seeking, loveless horror--a contemptible sneak, who, in
dread of missing the praises of men, crept away unseen, and left the
woman to bear alone our common sin?" What was he but a whited sepulchre,
full of dead men's bones and all uncleanness?--a fellow posing in the
pulpit as an example to the faithful, but knowing all the time that
somewhere in the land lived a woman--once a loving, trusting woman--who
could with a word hold him up to the world a hypocrite and a dastard--

   A fixed figure for the Time of scorn
   To point his slow unmoving finger at!

He sprang to the floor; the cold hand of an injured ghost seemed
clutching feebly at his throat. But, in or out of bed, what could he
do? Utterly helpless, he thought, but in truth not daring to look the
question as to what he could do in the face, he crept back ignominiously
into his bed; and, growing a little less uncomfortable, began to reason
with himself that things were not so bad as they had for that moment
seemed; that many another had failed in like fashion with him, but
his fault had been forgotten, and had never reappeared against him! No
culprit was ever required to bear witness against himself! He must learn
to discipline and repress his over-sensitiveness, otherwise it would one
day seize him at a disadvantage, and betray him into self-exposure!

Thus he reasoned--and sank back once more among the all but dead; the
loud alarum of his rousing conscience ceased, and he fell asleep in the
resolve to get away from Deemouth the first thing in the morning, before
Mr. Robertson should be awake. How much better it had been for him to
hold fast his repentant mood, and awake to tell everything! but he was
very far from having even approached any such resolution. Indeed no
practical idea of his, however much brooded over at night, had ever
lived to bear fruit in the morning; not once had he ever embodied in
action an impulse toward atonement! He could welcome the thought of a
final release from sin and suffering at the dissolution of nature,
but he always did his best to forget that at that very moment he was
suffering because of wrong he had done for which he was taking no least
trouble to make amends. He had lived for himself, to the destruction of
one whom he had once loved, and to the denial of his Lord and Master!

More than twice on his way home in the early morning, he all but turned
to go back to the police-station, but it was, as usual, only _all but_,
and he kept walking on.




CHAPTER XII


Already, ere James's flight was discovered, morning saw Mr. Robertson
on his way to do what he might for the redemption of one of whom he
knew little or nothing: the policemen returning from their night's duty,
found him already at the door of the office. He was at once admitted,
for he was well known to most of them. He found the poor woman miserably
recovered from the effects of her dissipation, and looking so woebegone,
that the heart of the good man was immediately filled with profoundest
pity, recognizing before him a creature whose hope was wasted to the
verge of despair. She neither looked up nor spoke; but what he could see
of her face appeared only ashamed, neither sullen nor vengeful. When
he spoke to her, she lifted her head a little, but not her eyes to his
face, confessing apparently that she had nothing to say for herself; and
he saw her plainly at the point of taking refuge in the Dee. Tenderly,
as if to the little one he had left behind him in bed, he spoke in
her scarce listening ear child-soothing words of almost inarticulate
sympathy, which yet his tone carried where they were meant to go. She
lifted her lost eyes at length, saw his face, and burst into tears.

"Na, na," she cried, through tearing sobs, "ye canna help me, sir!
There's naething 'at you or onybody can dee for me! But I'm near the
mou o' the pit, and God be thankit, I'll be ower the rim o' 't or I hae
grutten my last greit oot!--For God's sake gie me a drink--a drink o'
onything!"

"I daurna gie ye onything to ca' drink," answered the minister, who
could scarcely speak for the swelling in his throat. "The thing to dee
ye guid is a cup o' het tay! Ye canna hae had a moofu' this mornin! I
hae a cab waitin me at the door, and ye'll jist get in, my puir bairn,
and come awa hame wi' me! My wife'll be doon afore we win back, and
she'll hae a cup o' tay ready for ye in a moment! You and me 'ill hae
oor brakfast thegither."

"Ken ye what ye're sayin, sir? I daurna luik an honest wuman i' the
face. I'm sic as ye ken naething aboot."

"I ken a heap aboot fowk o' a' kin's--mair a heap, I'm thinkin, nor ye
ken yersel!--I ken mair aboot yersel, tee, nor ye think; I hae seen ye
i' my ain kirk mair nor ance or twice. The Sunday nicht afore last I was
preachin straucht intil yer bonny face, and saw ye greitin, and maist
grat mysel. Come awa hame wi' me, my dear; my wife's anither jist like
mysel, an'll turn naething to ye but the smilin side o' her face, I s'
un'ertak! She's a fine, herty, couthy, savin kin' o' wuman, my wife!
Come ye til her, and see!"

Isy rose to her feet.

"Eh, but I would like to luik ance mair intil the face o' a bonny, clean
wuman!" she said. "I'll gang, sir," she went on, with sudden resolve
"--only, I pray ye, sir, mak speed, and tak me oot o' the sicht o'fowk!"

"Ay, ay, come awa; we s' hae ye oot o' this in a moment," answered Mr.
Robertson.--"Put the fine doon to me," he whispered to the inspector as
they passed him on their way out.

The man returned his nod, and took no further notice.

"I thoucht that was what would come o' 't!" he murmured to himself,
looking after them with a smile. But indeed he knew little of what was
going to come of it!

The good minister, whose heart was the teacher of his head, and who was
not ashamed either of himself or his companion, showed Isy into their
little breakfast-parlour, and running up the stair to his wife, told her
he had brought the woman home, and wanted her to come down at once. Mrs.
Robertson, who was dressing her one child, hurried her toilet, gave over
the little one to the care of her one servant, and made haste to welcome
the poor shivering night-bird, waiting with ruffled feathers below. When
she opened the door, the two women stood for a moment silently gazing
on each other--then the wife opened her arms wide, and the girl fled to
their shelter; but her strength failing her on the way, she fell to the
floor. Instantly the other was down by her side. The husband came to her
help; and between them they got her at once on the little couch.

"Shall I get the brandy?" said Mrs. Robertson.

"Try a cup of tea," he answered.

His wife made haste, and soon had the tea poured out and cooling. But
Isy still lay motionless. Her hostess raised the helpless head upon her
arm, put a spoonful of the tea to her lips, and found to her joy that
she tried to swallow it. The next minute she opened her eyes, and would
have risen; but the rescuing hand held her down.

"I want to tell ye," moaned Isy with feeble expostulation, "'at ye dinna
ken wha ye hae taen intil yer hoose! Lat me up to get my breath, or I'll
no be able to tell ye."

"Drink your tea," answered the other, "and then say what you like.
There's no hurry. You'll have time enough."

The poor girl opened her eyes wide, and gazed for a moment at Mrs.
Robertson. Then she took the cup and drank the tea. Her new friend went
on--

"You must just be content to bide where you are a day or two. Ye're no
to fash yersel aboot onything: I have clothes enough to give you all the
change you can want. Hold your tongue, please, and finish your tea."

"Eh, mem," cried Isy, "fowk 'ill say ill o' ye, gien they see the like
o' me in yer hoose!"

"Lat them say, and say 't again! What's fowk but muckle geese!"

"But there's the minister and his character!" she persisted.

"Hoots! what cares the minister?" said his wife. "Speir at him there,
what he thinks o' clash."

"'Deed," answered her husband, "I never heedit it eneuch to tell!
There's but ae word I heed, and that's my Maister's!"

"Eh, but ye canna lift me oot o' the pit!" groaned the poor girl.

"God helpin, I can," returned the minister. "--But ye're no i' the pit
yet by a lang road; and oot o' that road I s' hae ye, please God, afore
anither nicht has darkent!"

"I dinna ken what's to come o' me!" again she groaned.

"That we'll sune see! Brakfast's to come o' ye first, and syne my wife
and me we'll sit in jeedgment upo ye, and redd things up. Min' ye're to
say what ye like, and naither ill fowk nor unco guid sail come nigh ye."

A pitiful smile flitted across Isy's face, and with it returned the
almost babyish look that used to form part of her charm. Like an
obedient child, she set herself to eat and drink what she could; and
when she had evidently done her best--

"Now put up your feet again on the sofa, and tell us everything," said
the minister.

"No," returned Isy; "I'm not at liberty to tell you _everything_."

"Then tell us what you please--so long as it's true, and that I am sure
it will be," he rejoined.

"I will, sir," she answered.

For several moments she was silent, as if thinking how to begin; then,
after a gasp or two,--

"I'm not a good woman," she began. "Perhaps I am worse than you think
me.--Oh, my baby! my baby!" she cried, and burst into tears.

"There's nae that mony o' 's just what ither fowk think us," said the
minister's wife. "We're in general baith better and waur nor that.--But
tell me ae thing: what took ye, last nicht, straucht frae the kirk to
the public? The twa haudna weel thegither!"

"It was this, ma'am," she replied, resuming the more refined speech to
which, since living at Deemouth, she had been less accustomed--"I had
a shock that night from suddenly seeing one in the church whom I had
thought never to see again; and when I got into the street, I turned so
sick that some kind body gave me whisky, and that was how, not having
been used to it for some time, that I disgraced myself. But indeed, I
have a much worse trouble and shame upon me than that--one you would
hardly believe, ma'am!"

"I understand," said Mrs. Robertson, modifying her speech also the
moment she perceived the change in that of her guest: "you saw him
in church--the man that got you into trouble! I thought that must be
it!--won't you tell me all about it?"

"I will not tell his name. _I_ was the most in fault, for I knew
better; and I would rather die than do him any more harm!--Good morning,
ma'am!--I thank you kindly, sir! Believe me I am not ungrateful,
whatever else I may be that is bad."

She rose as she spoke, but Mrs. Robertson got to the door first, and
standing between her and it, confronted her with a smile.

"Don't think I blame you for holding your tongue, my dear. I don't want
you to tell. I only thought it might be a relief to you. I believe, if
I were in the same case--or, at least, I hope so--that hot pincers
wouldn't draw his name out of me. What right has any vulgar inquisitive
woman to know the thing gnawing at your heart like a live serpent?
I will never again ask you anything about him.--There! you have my
promise!--Now sit down again, and don't be afraid. Tell me what you
please, and not a word more. The minister is sure to find something to
comfort you."

"What can anybody say or do to comfort such as me, ma'am? I am
lost--lost out of sight! Nothing can save me! The Saviour himself
wouldn't open the door to a woman that left her suckling child out in
the dark night!--That's what I did!" she cried, and ended with a wail as
from a heart whose wound eternal years could never close.

In a while growing a little calmer--

"I would not have you think, ma'am," she resumed, "that I wanted to get
rid of the darling. But my wits went all of a sudden, and a terror, I
don't know of what, came upon me. Could it have been the hunger, do you
think? I laid him down in the heather, and ran from him. How far I went,
I do not know. All at once I came to myself, and knew what I had done,
and ran to take him up. But whether I lost my way back, or what I did,
or how it was, I cannot tell, only I could not find him! Then for a
while I think I must have been clean out of my mind, and was always
seeing him torn by the foxes, and the corbies picking out his eyes. Even
now, at night, every now and then, it comes back, and I cannot get the
sight out of my head! For a while it drove me to drink, but I got rid of
that until just last night, when again I was overcome.--Oh, if I could
only keep from seeing the beasts and birds at his little body when I'm
falling asleep!"

She gave a smothered scream, and hid her face in her hands. Mrs.
Robertson, weeping herself, sought to comfort her, but it seemed in
vain.

"The worst of it is," Isy resumed, "--for I must confess everything,
ma'am!--is that I cannot tell what I may have done in the drink. I may
even have told his name, though I remember nothing about it! It must
be months, I think, since I tasted a drop till last night; and now I've
done it again, and I'm not fit he should ever cast a look at me! My
heart's just like to break when I think I may have been false to him,
as well as false to his child! If all the devils would but come and tear
me, I would say, thank ye, sirs!"

"My dear," came the voice of the parson from where he sat listening to
every word she uttered, "my dear, naething but the han' o' the Son o'
Man'll come nigh ye oot o' the dark, saft-strokin yer hert, and closin
up the terrible gash intil't. I' the name o' God, the saviour o' men, I
tell ye, dautie, the day 'ill come whan ye'll smile i' the vera face o'
the Lord himsel, at the thoucht o' what he has broucht ye throuw! Lord
Christ, haud a guid grup o' thy puir bairn and hers, and gie her back
her ain. Thy wull be deen!--and that thy wull's a' for redemption!--Gang
on wi' yer tale, my lassie."

"'Deed, sir, I can say nae mair--and seem to hae nae mair to say.--I'm
some--some sick like!"

She fell back on the sofa, white as death.

The parson was a big man; he took her up in his arms, and carried her to
a room they had always ready on the chance of a visit from "one of the
least of these."

At the top of the stair stood their little daughter, a child of five
or six, wanting to go down to her mother, and wondering why she was not
permitted.

"Who is it, moder?" she whispered, as Mrs. Robertson passed her,
following her husband and Isy. "Is she very dead?"

"No, darling," answered her mother; "it is an angel that has lost her
way, and is tired--so tired!--You must be very quiet, and not disturb
her. Her head is going to ache very much."

The child turned and went down the stair, step by step, softly, saying--

"I will tell my rabbit not to make any noise--and to be as white as he
can."

Once more they succeeded in bringing back to the light of consciousness
her beclouded spirit. She woke in a soft white bed, with two faces of
compassion bending over her, closed her eyes again with a smile of sweet
content, and was soon wrapt in a wholesome slumber.

In the meantime, the caitiff minister had reached his manse, and found
a ghastly loneliness awaiting him--oh, how much deeper than that of the
woman he had forsaken! She had lost her repute and her baby; he had lost
his God! He had never seen his shape, and had not his word abiding in
him; and now the vision of him was closed in an unfathomable abyss of
darkness, far, far away from any point his consciousness could reach!
The signs of God were around him in the Book, around him in the world,
around him in his own existence--but the signs only! God did not
speak to him, did not manifest himself to him. God was not where James
Blatherwick had ever sought him; he was not in any place where was the
least likelihood of his ever looking for or finding him!




CHAPTER XIII


It must be remembered that Blatherwick knew nothing of the existence
of his child: such knowledge might have modified the half-conscious
satisfaction with which, on his way home, he now and then saw a
providence in the fact that he had been preserved from marrying a
woman who had now proved herself capable of disgracing him in the very
streets. But during his slow journey of forty miles, most of which he
made on foot, hounded on from within to bodily motion, he had again, as
in the night, to pass through many an alternation of thought and feeling
and purpose. To and fro in him, up and down, this way and that, went
the changing currents of self-judgment, of self-consolement, and of
fresh-gathering dread. Never for one persistent minute was his mind
clear, his purpose determined, his line set straight for honesty. He
must live up--not to the law of righteousness, but to the show of what
a minister ought to be! he must appear unto men! In a word, he must
keep up the deception he had begun in childhood, and had, until of late
years, practised unknowingly! Now he knew it, and went on, not knowing
how to get rid of it; or rather, shrinking in utter cowardice from the
confession which alone could have set him free. Now he sought only how
to conceal his deception and falseness. He had no pleasure in them,
but was consciously miserable in knowing himself not what he seemed--in
being compelled, as he fancied himself in excuse, to look like one that
had not sinned. In his heart he grumbled that God should have forsaken
him so far as to allow him to disgrace himself before his conscience.
He did not yet see that his foulness was ingrained; that the Ethiopian
could change his skin, or the leopard his spots, as soon as he; that he
had never yet looked purity in the face; that the fall which disgraced
him in his own eyes was but the necessary outcome of his character--that
it was no accident but an unavoidable result; that his true nature had
but disclosed itself, and appeared--as everything hid must be known,
everything covered must be revealed. Even _to begin_ the purification
without which his moral and spiritual being must perish eternally,
he must dare to look on himself as he was: he _would_ not recognize
himself, and thought he lay and would lie hid from all. Dante describes
certain of the redeemed as lying each concealed in his or her own cocoon
of emitted light: James lay hidden like a certain insect in its own
_gowk-spittle_. It is strange, but so it is, that many a man will never
yield to see himself until he become aware of the eyes of other men
fixed upon him; they seeing him, and he knowing that they see him, then
first, even to himself, will he be driven to confess what he has long
all but known. Blatherwick's hour was on its way, slow-coming, but no
longer to be shunned. His soul was ripening to self-declaration. The
ugly self must blossom, must show itself the flower, the perfection of
that evil thing he counted himself! What a hold has not God upon us in
this inevitable ripening of the unseen into the visible and present! The
flower is there, and must appear!

In the meantime he suffered, and went on in silence, walking like a
servant of the Ancient of Days, and knowing himself a whited sepulchre.
Within him he felt the dead body that could not rest until it was laid
bare to the sun; but all the time he comforted himself that he had
not fallen a second time, and that the _once_ would not be remembered
against him: did not the fact that it was forgotten, most likely was
never known, indicate the forgiveness of God? And so, unrepentant, he
remained unforgiven, and continued a hypocrite and the slave of sin.

But the hideous thing was not altogether concealed; something showed
under the covering whiteness! His mother saw that something shapeless
haunted him, and often asked herself what it could be, but always
shrank even from conjecturing. His father felt that he had gone from
him utterly, and that his son's feeding of the flock had done nothing to
bring him and his parents nearer to each other! What could be hidden, he
thought, beneath the mask of that unsmiling face?

But there was a humble observer who saw deeper than the parents--John
MacLear, the soutar.

One day, after about a fortnight, the minister walked into the workshop
of the soutar, and found him there as usual. His hands were working away
diligently, but his thoughts had for some time been brooding over the
blessed fact, that God is not the God of the perfect only, but of the
growing as well; not the God of the righteous only, but of such as
hunger and thirst after righteousness.

"God blaw on the smoking flax, and tie up the bruised reed!" he was
saying to himself aloud, when in walked the minister.

Now, as in some other mystical natures, a certain something had been
developed in the soutar not unlike a spirit of prophecy--an insight
which, seemingly without exercise of the will, sometimes laid bare to
him in a measure the thoughts and intents of hearts in which he was more
than usually interested; or perhaps it was rather a faculty, working
unconsciously, of putting signs together, and drawing from them
instantaneous conclusion of the fact at which they pointed. After their
greeting, he suddenly looked up at his visitor with a certain fixed
attention: the mere glance had shown him that he looked ill, and he now
saw that something in the man's heart was eating at it like a canker.
Therewith at once arose in his brain the question: could he be the
father of the little one crowing in the next room? But he shut it into
the darkest closet of his mind, shrinking from the secret of another
soul, as from the veil of the Holy of Holies! The next moment, however,
came the thought: what if the man stood in need of the offices of a
friend? It was one thing to pry into a man's secret; another, to help
him escape from it! As out of this thought the soutar sat looking at him
for a moment, the minister felt the hot blood rush to his cheeks.

"Ye dinna luik that weel, minister," said the soutar: "is there onything
the maitter wi' ye, sir?"

"Nothing worth mentioning," answered the parson. "I have sometimes a
touch of headache in the early morning, especially when I have sat later
than usual over my books the night before; but it always goes off during
the day."

"Ow weel, sir, that's no, as ye say, a vera sairious thing! I couldna
help fancyin ye had something on yer min' by ord'nar!"

"Naething, naething," answered James with a feeble laugh. "--But," he
went on--and something seemed to send the words to his lips without
giving him time to think--"it is curious you should say that, for I was
just thinking what was the real intent of the apostle in his injunction
to confess our faults one to another."

The moment he uttered the words he felt as if he had proclaimed his
secret on the housetop; and he would have begun the sentence afresh,
with some notion of correcting it; but again he knew the hot blood shoot
to his face.--"I _must_ go on with something!" he felt rather than said
to himself, "or those sharp eyes will see through and through me!"

"It came into my mind," he went on, "that I should like to know what
_you_ thought about the passage: it cannot surely give the least ground
for auricular confession! I understand perfectly how a man may want
to consult a friend in any difficulty--and that friend naturally the
minister; but--"

This was by no means a thing he had meant to say, but he seemed carried
on to say he knew not what. It was as if, without his will, the will
of God was driving the man to the brink of a pure confession--to the
cleansing of his stuffed bosom "of that perilous stuff which weighs upon
the heart."

"Do you think, for instance," he continued, thus driven, "that a man is
bound to tell _everything_--even to the friend he loves best?"

"I think," answered the soutar after a moment's thought, "that we must
answer the _what_, before we enter upon the _how much_. And I think,
first of all we must ask--to _whom_ are we bound to confess?--and there
surely the answer is, to him to whom we have done the wrong. If we have
been grumbling in our hearts, it is to God we must confess: who else
has to do with the matter? To _Him_ we maun flee the moment oor eyes
are opent to what we've been aboot! But, gien we hae wranged ane o' oor
fallow-craturs, wha are we to gang til wi' oor confession but that same
fallow-cratur? It seems to me we maun gang to that man first--even afore
we gang to God himsel. Not one moment must we indulge procrastination on
the plea o' prayin! From our vera knees we maun rise in haste, and say
to brother or sister, 'I've done ye this or that wrang: forgie me.' God
can wait for your prayer better nor you, or him ye've wranged, can
wait for your confession! Efter that, ye maun at ance fa' to your best
endeevour to mak up for the wrang. 'Confess your sins,' I think
it means, 'each o' ye to the ither again whom ye hae dene the
offence.'--Divna ye think that's the cowmonsense o' the maitter?"

"Indeed, I think you must be right!" replied the minister, who sat
revolving only how best, alas, to cover his retreat! "I will go home at
once and think it all over. Indeed, I am even now all but convinced that
what you say must be what the Apostle intended!"

With a great sigh, of which he was not aware, Blatherwick rose and
walked from the kitchen, hoping he looked--not guilty, but sunk in
thought. In truth he was unable to think. Oppressed and heavy-laden with
the sense of a duty too unpleasant for performance, he went home to his
cheerless manse, where his housekeeper was the only person he had
to speak to, a woman incapable of comforting anybody. There he went
straight to his study, but, kneeling, found he could not pray the
simplest prayer; not a word would come, and he could not pray without
words! He was dead, and in hell--so far perished that he felt nothing.
He rose, and sought the open air; it brought him no restoration. He had
not heeded his friend's advice, had not entertained the thought of the
one thing possible to him--had not moved, even in spirit, toward Isy!
The only comfort he could now find for his guilty soul was the thought
that he could do nothing, for he did not know where Isy was to be found.
When he remembered the next moment that his friend Robertson must be
able to find her, he soothed his conscience with the reflection that
there was no coach till the next morning, and in the meantime he could
write: a letter would reach him almost as soon as he could himself!

But what then would Robertson think? He might give his wife the letter
to read! She might even read it of herself, for they concealed nothing
from each other! So he only walked the faster, tired himself, and earned
an appetite as the result of his day's work! He ate a good dinner,
although with little enjoyment, and fell fast asleep in his chair. No
letter was written to Robertson that day. No letter of such sort was
ever written. The spirit was not willing, and the flesh was weakness
itself.

In the evening he took up a learned commentary on the Book of Job; but
he never even approached the discovery of what Job wanted, received, and
was satisfied withal. He never saw that what he himself needed, but did
not desire, was the same thing--even a sight of God! He never discovered
that, when God came to Job, Job forgot all he had intended to say to
him--did not ask him a single question--knew that all was well. The
student of Scripture remained blind to the fact that the very presence
of the Living One, of the Father of men, proved sufficient in itself to
answer every question, to still every doubt! But then James's heart was
not pure like Job's, and therefore he could never have seen God; he did
not even desire to see him, and so could see nothing as it was. He read
with the blindness of the devil in his heart.

In Marlowe's _Faust_, the student asks Mephistopheles--

   How comes it then that thou art out of hell?

And the demon answers him--

   Why, this is hell, nor am I out of it;

and again--

                    Where we are is hell;
    And where hell is there must we ever be:
    ... when all the world dissolves,
    And every creature shall be purified,
    All places shall be hell that are not heaven;

and yet again--

   I tell thee I am damned, and now in hell;

and it was thus James fared; and thus he went to bed.

And while he lay there sleepless, or walked in his death to and fro in
the room, his father and mother, some three miles away, were talking
about him.




CHAPTER XIV


For some time they had lain silent, thinking about him by no means
happily. They were thinking how little had been their satisfaction in
their minister-son; and had gone back in their minds to a certain time,
long before, when conferring together about him, a boy at school.

Even then the heart of the mother had resented his coldness, his seeming
unconsciousness of his parents as having any share or interest in his
life or prospects. Scotch parents are seldom demonstrative to each other
or to their children; but not the less in them, possibly the hotter
because of their outward coldness, burns the causal fire, the central,
the deepest--that eternal fire, without which the world would turn to a
frozen clod, the love of the parent for the child. That must burn while
_the_ Father lives! that must burn until the universe _is_ the Father
and his children, and none beside. That fire, however long held down and
crushed together by the weight of unkindled fuel, must go on to gather
heat, and, gathering, it must glow, and at last break forth in the
scorching, yea devouring flames of a righteous indignation: the Father
must and _will_ be supreme, that his children perish not! But as yet
_The Father_ endured and was silent; and the child-parents also must
endure and be still! In the meantime their son remained hidden from them
as by an impervious moral hedge; he never came out from behind it, never
stood clear before them, and they were unable to break through to him:
within his citadel of indifference there was no angelic traitor to draw
back the bolts of its iron gates, and let them in. They had gone on
hoping, and hoping in vain, for some holy, lovely change in him; but
at last had to confess it a relief when he left the house, and went to
Edinburgh.

But the occasion to which I refer was long before that.

The two children were in bed and asleep, and the parents were lying
then, as they lay now, sleepless.

"Hoo's Jeemie been gettin on the day?" said his father.

"Well enough, I suppose," answered his mother, who did not then speak
Scotch quite so broad as her husband's, although a good deal broader
than her mother, the wife of a country doctor, would have permitted when
she was a child; "he's always busy at his books. He's a good boy, and a
diligent; there's no gainsayin that! But as to hoo he's gettin on, I
can beir no testimony. He never lets a word go from him as to what he's
doin, one way or anither. 'What _can_ he be thinkin aboot?' I say whiles
to mysel--sometimes ower and ower again. When I gang intil the parlour,
where he always sits till he has done his lessons, he never lifts his
heid to show that he hears me, or cares wha's there or wha isna. And as
soon as he's learnt them, he taks a buik and gangs up til his room, or
oot aboot the hoose, or intil the cornyard or the barn, and never comes
nigh me!--I sometimes won'er gien he would ever miss me deid!" she
ended, with a great sigh.

"Hoot awa, wuman! dinna tak on like that," returned her husband. "The
laddie's like the lave o' laddies! They're a' jist like pup-doggies till
their een comes oppen, and they ken them 'at broucht them here. He's
bun' to mak a guid man in time, and he canna dee that ohn learnt to be
a guid son to her 'at bore him!--Ye canna say 'at ever he contert ye! Ye
hae tellt me that a hunner times!"

"I have that! But I would hae had no occasion to dwall upo' the fac',
gien he had ever gi'en me, noo or than, jist a wee bit sign o' ony
affection!"

"Ay, doobtless! but signs are nae preefs! The affection, as ye ca' 't,
may be there, and the signs o' 't wantin!--But I ken weel hoo the hert
o' ye 's workin, my ain auld dautie!" he added, anxious to comfort her
who was dearer to him than son or daughter.

"I dinna think it wad be weel," he resumed after a pause, "for me to say
onything til 'im aboot his behaviour til 's mither: I dinna believe he
wud ken what I was aimin at! I dinna believe he has a notion o' onything
amiss in himsel, and I fear he wad only think I was hard upon him, and
no' fair. Ye see, gien a thing disna come o' 'tsel, no cryin upo' 't 'll
gar 't lift its heid--sae lang, at least, as the man kens naething aboot
it!"

"I dinna doobt ye're right, Peter," answered his wife; "I ken weel that
flytin 'ill never gar love spread oot his wings--excep' it be to flee
awa'! Naething but shuin can come o' flytin!"

"It micht be even waur nor shuin!" rejoined Peter."--But we better gang
til oor sleeps, lass!--We hae ane anither, come what may!"

"That's true, Peter; but aye the mair I hae you, the mair I want my
Jeemie!" cried the poor mother.

The father said no more. But, after a while, he rose, and stole softly
to his son's room. His wife stole after him, and found him on his knees
by the bedside, his face buried in the blankets, where his boy lay
asleep with calm, dreamless countenance.

She took his hand, and led him back to bed.

"To think," she moaned as they went, "'at yon's the same bairnie I
glowert at till my sowl ran oot at my een! I min' weel hoo I leuch and
grat, baith at ance, to think I was the mother o' a man-child! and I
thought I kenned weel what was i' the hert o' Mary, whan she claspit the
blessed ane til her boasom!"

"May that same bairnie, born for oor remeid, bring oor bairn til his
richt min' afore he's ower auld to repent!" responded the father in a
broken voice.

"What for," moaned Marion, "was the hert o' a mither put intil me? What
for was I made a wuman, whause life is for the beirin o' bairns to the
great Father o' a' gien this same was to be my reward?--Na, na, Lord,"
she went on, checking herself, "I claim naething but thy wull; and weel
I ken ye wouldna hae me think siclike thy wull!"




CHAPTER XV


It would be too much to say that the hearts of his parents took no
pleasure in the advancement of their son, such as it was. I suspect the
mother was glad to be proud where she could find no happiness--proud
with the love that lay incorruptible in her being. But the love that is
all on one side, though it may be stronger than death, can hardly be so
strong as life! A poor, maimed, one-winged thing, such love cannot soar
into any region of conscious bliss. Even when it soars into the region
where God himself dwells, it is but to partake there of the divine
sorrow which his heartless children cause him. My reader may well
believe that father nor mother dwelt much upon what their neighbours
called James's success--or cared in the least to talk about it: that
they would have felt to be mere hypocrisy, while hearty and genuine
relations were so far from perfect between them. Never to human being,
save the one to the other, and that now but very seldom, did they allude
to the bitterness which their own hearts knew; for to speak of it would
have seemed almost equivalent to disowning their son. And alas the
daughter was gone to whom the mother had at one time been able to bemoan
herself, knowing she understood and shared in their misery! For Isobel
would gladly have laid down her life to kindle in James's heart such a
love to their parents as her own.

We may now understand a little, into what sort of man the lad James
Blatherwick had grown. When he left Stonecross for the University, it
was with scarce a backward look; nothing was in his heart but eagerness
for the coming conflict. Having gained there one of its highest
bursaries, he never spent a thought, as he donned his red gown, on the
son of the poor widow who had competed with him, and who, failing, had
to leave ambition behind him and take a place in a shop--where, however,
he soon became able to keep, and did keep, his mother in what was to her
nothing less than happy luxury; while the successful James--well, so far
my reader already knows about him.

As often as James returned home for the vacations, things, as between
him and his parents, showed themselves unaltered; and by his third
return, the heart of his sister had ceased to beat any faster at the
thought of his arrival: she knew that he would but shake hands limply,
let hers drop, and the same moment be set down to read. Before the time
for taking his degree arrived, Isobel was gone to the great Father.
James never missed her, and neither wished nor was asked to go home to
her funeral. To his mother he was never anything more or less than quite
civil; she never asked him to do anything for her. He came and went as
he pleased, cared for nothing done on the farm or about the house, and
seemed, in his own thoughts and studies, to have more than enough to
occupy him. He had grown a powerful as well as handsome youth, and
had dropped almost every sign of his country breeding. He hardly ever
deigned a word in his mother-dialect, but spoke good English with
a Scotch accent. Neither had he developed any of the abominable
affectations by which not a few such as he have imagined to repudiate
their origin.

His father had not then first to discover that his son was far too fine
a gentleman to show any interest in agriculture, or put out his hand
to the least share in that oldest and most dignified of callings. His
mother continued to look forward, although with fading interest, to
the time when he should be--the messenger of a gospel which he nowise
understood; but his father did not at all share her anticipation; and
she came to know ere long that to hear him preach would but renew and
intensify a misery to which she had become a little accustomed in their
ordinary intercourse. The father felt that his boy had either left him a
long way off, or had never at any time come near him. He seemed to stand
afar upon some mountain-top of conscious or imagined superiority.

James, as one having no choice, lived at _home_, so called by custom
and use, but lived as one come of another breed than his parents, having
with theirs but few appreciable points of contact. Most conventional
of youths, he yet wrote verses in secret, and in his treasure-closet
worshipped Byron. What he wrote he seldom showed, and then only to
one or two of his fellow-students. Possibly he wrote only to prove to
himself that he could do that also, for he never doubted his faculty
in any direction. When he went to Edinburgh--to learn theology,
forsooth!--he was already an accomplished mathematician, and a yet
better classic, with some predilections for science, and a very small
knowledge of the same: his books showed for the theology, and for the
science, an occasional attempt to set his father right on some point of
chemistry. His first aspiration was to show himself a gentleman in the
eyes of the bubblehead calling itself Society--of which in fact he knew
nothing; and the next, to have his eloquence, at present existent only
in an ambitious imagination, recognized by the public. Such were the two
devils, or rather the two forms of the one devil Vanity, that possessed
him. He looked down on his parents, and the whole circumstance of
their ordered existence, as unworthy of him, because old-fashioned and
bucolic, occupied only with God's earth and God's animals, and having
nothing to do with the shows of life. And yet to the simply honourable,
to such of gentle breeding as despised mere show, the ways of life in
their house would have seemed altogether admirable: the homely, yet not
unfastidious modes and conditions of the unassuming homestead, would
have appeared to them not a little attractive. But James took no
interest in any of them, and, if possible, yet less in the ways of the
tradesmen and craftsmen of the neighbouring village. He never felt the
common humanity that made him one with them, did not in his thoughts
associate himself at all with them. Had he turned his feeling into
thoughts and words, he would have said, "I cannot help being the son of
a farmer, but at least my mother's father was a doctor; and had I been
consulted, my father should have been at least an officer in one of his
majesty's services, not a treader of dung or artificial manure!" The
root of his folly lay in the groundless self-esteem of the fellow;
fostered, I think, by a certain literature which fed the notion, if
indeed it did not plainly inculcate the _duty_ of rising in the world.
To such as he, the praise of men may well seem the patent of their
nobility; but the man whom we call _The Saviour_, and who knew the
secret of Life, warned his followers that they must not seek that sort
of distinction if they would be the children of the Father who claimed
them.

I have said enough, perhaps too much, of this most uninteresting of men!
How he came to be born such, is not for my speculation: had he remained
such, his story would not have been for my telling. How he became
something better, it remains my task to try to set forth.

I now complete the talk that followed the return of the simple couple to
bed. "I was jist thinkin, Peter," said Marion, after they had again
lain silent for a while, "o' the last time we spak thegither aboot the
laddie--it maun be nigh sax year sin syne, I'm thinkin!"

"'Deed I canna say! ye may be richt, Mirran," replied her spouse. "It's
no sic a cheery subjec' 'at we sud hae muckle to say to ane anither
anent it! He's a man noo, and weel luikit upo'; but it maks unco little
differ to his parents! He's jist as dour as ever, and as far as man
could weel be frae them he cam o'!--never a word to the ane or the ither
o' 's! Gien we war twa dowgs, he couldna hae less to say til's, and
micht weel hae mair! I s' warran' Frostie says mair in ae half-hoor to
his tyke, nor Jeemie has said to you or me sin' first he gaed to the
college!"

"Bairns is whiles a queer kin' o' a blessin!" remarked the mother. "But,
eh, Peter! it's what may lie ahint the silence that frichts me!"

"Lass, ye're frichtin _me_ noo! What _div_ ye mean?"

"Ow naething!" returned Marion, bursting into tears. "But a' at ance
it was borne in upo me, that there maun be something to accoont for the
thing. At the same time I daurna speir at God himsel what that thing
can be. For there's something waur noo, and has been for some time,
than ever was there afore! He has sic a luik, as gien he saw nor heard
onything but ae thing, the whilk ae thing keeps on inside him, and winna
wheesht. It's an awfu' thing to say o' a mither's ain laddie; and to hae
said it only to my ain man, and the father o' the laddie, maks my hert
like to brak!--it's as gien I had been fause to my ain flesh and blude
but to think it o' 'im!--Eh, Peter, what _can_ it be?"

"Ow jist maybe naething ava'! Maybe he's in love, and the lass winna
hear til 'im!"

"Na, Peter; love gars a man luik up, no doon at his ain feet! It gars
him fling his heid back, and set his een richt afore him--no turn them
in upo his ain inside! It maks a man straucht i' the back, strong i' the
airm, and bauld i' the hert.--Didna it you, Peter?"

"Maybe it did; I dinna min' vera weel.--But I see love can hardly be the
thing that's amiss wi' the lad. Still, even his parents maun tak tent o'
jeedgin--specially ane o' the Lord's ministers--maybe ane o' the Lord's
ain elec'!"

"It's awfu' to think--I daurna say 't--I daurna maist think the words
o' 't, Peter, but it _wull_ cry oot i' my vera hert!--Steik the door,
Peter--and ticht, that no a stray stirk may hear me!--Was a minister o'
the gospel ever a heepocreete, Peter?--like ane o' the auld scribes
and Pharisees, Peter?--Wadna it be ower terrible, Peter, to be
permittit?--Gien our ain only son was--"

But here she broke down; she could not finish the frightful sentence.
The farmer again left his bed, and dropt upon a chair by the side of it.
The next moment he sank on his knees, and hiding his face in his hands,
groaned, as from a thicket of torture--

"God in haven, hae mercy upon the haill lot o' 's."

Then, apparently unconscious of what he did, he went wandering from the
room, down to the kitchen, and out to the barn on his bare feet, closing
the door of the house behind him. In the barn he threw himself, face
downward, on a heap of loose straw, and there lay motionless. His wife
wept alone in her bed, and hardly missed him: it required of her no
reflection to understand whither he had gone, or what he was doing. He
was crying, like King Lear from the bitterness of an outraged father's
heart, to the Father of fathers:

"God, ye're a father yersel," he groaned; "and sae ye ken hoo it's rivin
at my hert!--Na, Lord, ye dinna ken; for ye never had a doobt aboot
_your_ son!--Na, I'm no blamin Jeemie, Lord; I'm no cryin oot upo _him_;
for ye ken weel hoo little I ken aboot him: he never opened the buik o'
his hert to _me_! Oh God, grant that he hae naething to hide; but gien
he has, Lord, pluck it oot o' 'im, and _him_ oot o' the glaur! latna him
stick there. I kenna hoo to shape my petition, for I'm a' i' the dark;
but deliver him some gait, Lord, I pray thee, for his mither's sake!--ye
ken what she is!--_I_ dinna coont for onything, but ye ken _her_!--Lord,
deliver the hert o' her frae the awfu'est o' a' her fears.--Lord, a
hypocreet! a Judas-man!"

More of what he said, I cannot tell; somehow this much has reached my
ears. He remained there upon the straw while hour after hour passed,
pleading with the great Father for his son; his soul now lost in dull
fatigue, now uttering itself in groans for lack of words, until at
length the dawn looked in on the night-weary earth, and into the two
sorrow-laden hearts, bringing with it a comfort they did not seek to
understand.




CHAPTER XVI


But it brought no solace to the mind of the weak, hard-hearted, and
guilty son. He had succeeded once more in temporarily soothing his
conscience with some narcotic of false comfort, and now slept the sleep
of the houseless, whose covering was narrower than he could wrap himself
in. Ah, those nights! Alas for the sleepless human soul out in the
eternal cold! But so heartless was James, that, if his mother had come
to him in the morning with her tear-dimmed eyes, he would never have
asked himself what could ail her; would never even have seen that she
was unhappy; least of all would have suspected himself the cause of her
red eyes and aching head, or that the best thing in him was that mental
uneasiness of which he was constantly aware. Thank God, there was no way
round the purifying fire! he could not escape it; he _must_ pass through
it!




CHAPTER XVII


Little knows the world what a power among men is the man who simply and
really believes in him who is Lord of the world to save men from
their sins! He may be neither wise nor prudent; he may be narrow and
dim-sighted even in the things he loves best; they may promise him much,
and yield him but a poor fragment of the joy that might be and ought to
be his; he may present them to others clothed in no attractive hues, or
in any word of power; and yet, if he has but that love to his neighbour
which is rooted in, and springs from love to his God, he is always a
redeeming, reconciling influence among his fellows. The Robertsons were
genial of heart, loving and tender toward man or woman in need of them;
their door was always on the latch for such to enter. If the parson
insisted on the wrath of God against sin, he did not fail to give
assurance of His tenderness toward such as had fallen. Together the
godly pair at length persuaded Isobel of the eager forgiveness of the
Son of Man. They assured her that he could not drive from him the very
worst of sinners, but loved--nothing less than tenderly _loved_ any
one who, having sinned, now turned her face to the Father. She
would doubtless, they said, have to see her trespass in the eyes of
unforgiving women, but the Lord would lift her high, and welcome her to
the home of the glad-hearted.

But poor Isy, who regarded her fault as both against God and the man who
had misled her, and was sick at the thought of being such as she judged
herself, insisted that nothing God himself could do, could ever restore
her, for nothing could ever make it that she had not fallen: such a
contradiction, such an impossibility alone could make her clean! God
might be ready to forgive her, but He could not love her! Jesus
might have made satisfaction for her sin, but how could that make any
difference in or to her? She was troubled that Jesus should have so
suffered, but that could not give her back her purity, or the peace of
mind she once possessed! That was gone for ever! The life before her
took the appearance of an unchanging gloom, a desert region whence the
gladness had withered, and whence came no purifying wind to blow from
her the odours of the grave by which she seemed haunted! Never to all
eternity could she be innocent again! Life had no interest for her! She
was, and must remain just what she was; for, alas, she could not cease
to be!

Such thoughts had at one period ravaged her life, but they had for some
time been growing duller and deader: now once more revived by goodness
and sympathy, they had resumed their gnawing and scorching, and she
had grown yet more hateful to herself. Even the two who befriended and
comforted her, could never, she thought, cease to regard her as what
they knew she was! But, strange to say, with this revival of her
suffering, came also a requickening of her long dormant imagination,
favoured and cherished, doubtless, by the peace and love that surrounded
her. First her dreams, then her broodings began to be haunted with sweet
embodiments. As if the agonized question of the guilty Claudius were
answered to her, to assure her that there _was_ "rain enough in the
sweet heavens to wash her white as snow," she sometimes would wake from
a dream where she stood in blessed nakedness with a deluge of
cool, comforting rain pouring upon her from the sweetness of those
heavens--and fall asleep again to dream of a soft strong west wind
chasing from her the offensive emanations of the tomb, that seemed to
have long persecuted her nostrils as did the blood of Duncan those of
the wretched Lady Macbeth. And every night to her sinful bosom came back
the soft innocent hands of the child she had lost--when ever and again
her dream would change, and she would be Hagar, casting her child away,
and fleeing from the sight of his death. More than once she dreamed that
an angel came to her, and went out to look for her boy--only to return
and lay him in her arms grievously mangled by some horrid beast.

When the first few days of her sojourn with the good Samaritans were
over, and she had gathered strength enough to feel that she ought no
longer to be burdensome to them, but look for work, they positively
refused to let her leave them before her spirit also had regained some
vital tone, and she was able to "live a little"; and to that end they
endeavoured to revive in her the hope of finding her lost child: setting
inquiry on foot in every direction, they promised to let her know the
moment when her presence should begin to cause them inconvenience.

"Let you go, child?" her hostess had exclaimed: "God forbid! Go you
shall not until you go for your own sake: you cannot go for ours!"

"But I'm such a burden to you--and so useless!"

"Was the Lord a burden to Mary and Lazarus, think ye, my poor bairn?"
rejoined Mrs. Robertson.

"Don't, ma'am, please!" sobbed Isy.

"Inasmuch as ye did it to one of the least of these, ye did it to me!"
insisted her hostess.

"That doesna apply, ma'am," objected Isy. "I'm nane o' his!"

"Who is then? Who was it he came to save? Are you not one of his lost
sheep? Are you not weary and heavy-laden? Will you never let him feel at
home with you? Are _you_ to say who he is to love and who he isn't? Are
_you_ to tell him who are fit to be counted his, and who are not good
enough?"

Isy was silent for a long time. The foundations of her coming peace were
being dug deeper, and laid wider.

She still found it impossible, from the disordered state of her mind at
the time, to give any notion of whereabout she had been when she laid
her child down, and leaving him, could not again find him. And Maggie,
who loved him passionatately and believed him wilfully abandoned,
cherished no desire to discover one who could claim him, but was
unworthy to have him. For a long time, therefore, neither she nor
her father ever talked, or encouraged talk about him; whence certain
questing busybodies began to snuff and give tongue. It was all very
well, they said, for the cobbler and his Maggie to pose as rescuers and
benefactors: but whose was the child? His growth nevertheless went on
all the same, and however such hints might seem to concern him, happily
they never reached him. Maggie flattered herself, indeed, that never in
this world would they reach him, but would die away in the void, or like
a fallen wave against the heedless shore! And yet, all the time, in the
not so distant city, a loving woman was weeping and pining for lack
of him, whose conduct, in the eyes of the Robertsons, was not merely
blameless, but sweetly and manifestly true, constantly yielding fuel to
the love that encompassed her. But, although mentally and spiritually
she was growing rapidly, she seemed to have lost all hope. For, deeper
in her soul, and nearer the root of her misery than even the loss of her
child, lay the character and conduct of the man to whom her love seemed
inextinguishable. His apostasy from her, his neglect of her, and her
constantly gnawing sense of pollution, burned at the bands of her life;
and her friends soon began to fear that she was on the verge of a slow
downward slide, upon which there is seldom any turning.

The parson and his wife had long been on friendliest terms with the
farmer of Stonecross and his wife; and, brooding on the condition of
their guest, it was natural that the thought of Mrs. Blatherwick should
occur to them as one who might be able to render them the help they
needed for her. Difficulties were in the way, it was true, chiefly that
of conveying a true conception of the nature and character of the woman
in whom they desired her interest; but if Mrs. Blatherwick were once to
see her, there would be no fear of the result: received at the farm, she
was certain in no way to compromise them! They were confident she would
never belie the character they were prepared to give her. Neither was
there any one at the farm for whom it was possible to dread intercourse
with her, seeing that, since the death of their only daughter, they had
not had a servant in the house. It was concluded therefore between them
that Mr. Robertson should visit their friends at Stonecross, and tell
them all they knew about Isy.

It was a lovely morning in the decline of summer, the corn nearly full
grown, but still green, without sign of the coming gold of perfection,
when the minister mounted the top of the coach, to wait, silent and
a little anxious, for the appearance of the coachman from the office,
thrusting the waybill into the pocket of his huge greatcoat, to gather
his reins, and climb heavily to his perch. A journey of four hours,
through a not very interesting country, but along a splendid road,
would carry him to the village where the soutar lived, and where James
Blatherwick was parson! There a walk of about three miles awaited him--a
long and somewhat weary way to the town-minister--accustomed indeed to
tramping the hard pavements, but not to long walks unbroken by calls.
Climbing at last the hill on which the farmhouse stood, he caught sight
of Peter Blatherwick in a neighbouring field of barley stubble, with the
reins of a pair of powerful Clydesdales in his hands, wrestling with
the earth as it strove to wrench from his hold the stilts of the plough
whose share and coulter he was guiding through it. Peter's delight was
in the open air, and hard work in it. He was as far from the vulgar idea
that a man rose in the scale of honour when he ceased to labour with his
hands, as he was from the fancy that a man rose in the kingdom of heaven
when he was made a bishop.

As to his higher nature, the farmer believed in God--that is, he tried
to do what God required of him, and thus was on the straight road to
know him. He talked little about religion, and was no partisan. When he
heard people advocating or opposing the claims of this or that party
in the church, he would turn away with a smile such as men yield to
the talk of children. He had no time, he would say, to spend on such
disputes: he had enough to do in trying to practise what was beyond
dispute.

He was a reading man, who not merely drank at every open source he came
across, but thought over what he read, and was, therefore, a man of true
intelligence, who was regarded by his neighbours with more than ordinary
respect. He had been the first in the district to lay hold of the
discoveries in chemistry applicable to agriculture, and had made use of
them, with notable results, upon his own farm; setting thus an example
which his neighbours were so ready to follow, that the region, nowise
remarkable for its soil, soon became remarkable for its crops. The
note-worthiest thing in him, however, was his _humanity_, shown first
and chiefly in the width and strength of his family affections. He had
a strong drawing, not only to his immediate relations, but to all of his
blood; who were not few, for he came of an ancient family, long settled
in the neighbourhood. In his worldly affairs he was well-to-do, having
added not a little to the little his father had left him; but he was no
lover of money, being open-handed even to his wife, upon whom first your
money-grub is sure to exercise his parsimony. There was, however, at
Stonecross, little call to spend and less temptation from without,
the farm itself being equal to the supply of almost every ordinary
necessity.

In disposition Peter Blatherwick was a good-humoured, even merry man,
with a playful answer almost always ready for a greeting neighbour.

The minister did not however go on to join the farmer, but went to the
house, which stood close at hand, with its low gable toward him. Late
summer still lorded it in the land; only a few fleecy clouds shared the
blue of the sky with the ripening sun, and on the hot ridges the air
pulsed and trembled, like vaporized layers of mother-of-pearl.

At the end of the idle lever, no sleepy old horse was now making his
monotonous rounds; his late radiance, born of age and sunshine, was
quenched in the dark of the noonday stall. But the peacock still
strutted among the ricks, as conscious of his glorious plumage, as
regardless of the ugliness of his feet as ever; now and then checking
the rhythmic movement of his neck, undulating green and blue, to scratch
the ground with those feet, and dart his beak, with apparently spiteful
greed, at some tiny crystal of quartz or pickle of grain they exposed;
or, from the towering steeple of his up lifted throat, to utter his
self-satisfaction in a hideous cry.

In the gable before him, Mr. Robertson passed a low window, through
which he had a glimpse of the pretty, old-fashioned parlour within, as
he went round to the front, to knock at the nearer of two green-painted
doors.

Mrs. Blatherwick herself came to open it, and finding who it was
that knocked--of all men the most welcome to her in her present
mood--received him with the hearty simplicity of an evident welcome.

For was he not a minister? and was not he who caused all her trouble, a
minister also? She was not, indeed, going to lay open her heart and let
him see into its sorrow; for to confess her son a cause of the least
anxiety to her, would be faithless and treacherous; but the unexpected
appearance of Mr. Robertson brought her, nevertheless, as it were the
dawn of a winter morning after a long night of pain.

She led him into the low-ceiled parlour, the green gloom of the big
hydrangea that filled the front window, and the ancient scent of the
withered rose-leaves in the gorgeous china basin on the gold-bordered
table-cover. There the minister, after a few kind commonplaces, sat for
a moment, silently pondering how to enter upon his communication. But he
did not ponder long, however; for his usual way was to rush headlong
at whatever seemed to harbour a lion, and come at once to the
death-grapple.

Marion Blatherwick was a good-looking woman, with a quiet strong
expression, and sweet gray eyes. The daughter of a country surgeon, she
had been left an orphan without means; but was so generally respected,
that all said Mr. Blatherwick had never done better than when he married
her. Their living son seemed almost to have died in his infancy; their
dead daughter, gone beyond range of eye and ear, seemed never to have
left them: there was no separation, only distance between them.

"I have taken the liberty, Mrs. Blatherwick, of coming to ask your help
in a great perplexity," began Mr. Robertson, with an embarrassment she
had never seen in him before, and which bewildered her not a little.

"Weel, sir, it's an honour done me--a great honour, for which I hae to
thank ye, I'm sure!" she answered.

"Bide ye, mem, till ye hear what it is," rejoined the minister. "We,
that is, my wife and mysel, hae a puir lass at hame i' the hoose. We hae
ta'en a great interest in her for some weeks past; but noo we're 'maist
at oor wits' en' what to do wi' her neist. She's sair oot o' hert, and
oot o' health, and out o' houp; and in fac' she stan's in sair, ay,
desperate need o' a cheenge."

"Weel, that ouchtna to mak muckle o' a diffeeclety atween auld friens
like oorsels, Maister Robertson!--Ye wad hae us tak her in for a whilie,
till she luiks up a bit, puir thing?--Hoo auld may she be?"

"She can hardly be mair nor twenty, or aboot that--sic like as your
ain bonnie lassie would hae been by this time, gien she had ripent
here i'stead o' gaein awa to the gran' finishin schuil o' the just made
perfec. Weel min' I her bonny face! And, 'deed, this ane's no' that
unlike yer ain Isy! She something favours her."

"Eh, sir, fess her to me! My hert's waitin for her! Her mither maunna
lowse her! She couldna stan' that!"

"She has nae mither, puir thing!--But ye maun dee naething in a hurry; I
maun tell ye aboot her first!"

"I'm content 'at she's a frien o' yours, sir. I ken weel ye wad never
hae me tak intil my hoose are that was na fit--and a' the lads aboot the
place frae ae mornin til anither!"

"Indeed she _is_ a frien o' mine, mem; and I hae never a dreid o'
onything happenin ye wadna like. She's in ower sair trouble to cause ony
anxiety. The fac' is, she's had a terrible misfortun!"

The good woman started, drew herself up a little, and said hurriedly,

"There's no a wean, is there?"

"'Deed is there, mem!--but pairt o' the meesery is, the bairn's
disappeart; and she's brackin her heart aboot 'im. She's maist oot o'
her min', mem! No that she's onything but perfecly reasonable, and gies
never a grain o' trouble! I canna doobt she'd be a great help til ye,
and that ilka minute ye saw fit to lat her bide. But she's jist huntit
wi' the idea that she pat the bairnie doon, and left him, and kens na
whaur.--Verily, mem, she's are o' the lambs o' the Lord's ain flock!"

"That's no the w'y the lambs o' _his_ flock are i' the w'y o' behavin
themsels!--I fear me, sir, ye're lattin yer heart rin awa wi' yer
jeedgment!"

"I hae aye coontit Mary Magdalen are o' the Lord's ain yowies, that he
left the lave i' the wilderness to luik for: this is sic anither! Gien
ye help Him to come upon her, ye'll cairry her hame 'atween ye rej'icin!
And ye min' hoo he stude 'atween are far waur nor her, and the ill
men that would fain hae shamet her, and sent them oot like sae mony
tykes--thae gran' Pharisees--wi their tails tuckit in 'atween their
legs!--Sair affrontit they war, doobtless!--But I maun be gaein, mem,
for we're no vera like to agree! My Maister's no o' ae min' wi' you,
mem, aboot sic affairs--and sae I maun gang, and lea' ye to yer ain
opingon! But I would jist remin' ye, mem, that she's at this present i'
_my_ hoose, wi my wife; and my wee bit lassie hings aboot her as gien
she was an angel come doon to see the bonny place this warl luks frae
up there.--Eh, puir lammie, the stanes oucht to be feower upo thae
hill-sides!"

"What for that, Maister Robertson?"

"'Cause there's so mony o' them whaur human herts oucht to be.--Come
awa, doggie!" he added, rising.

"Dear me, sir! haena ye hae a grain o' patience to waur (_spend_) upon
a puir menseless body?" cried Marion, wringing her hands in dismay. "To
think _I_ sud be nice whaur my Lord was sae free!"

"Ay," returned the minister, "and he was jist as clean as ever, wi' mony
ane siclike as her inside the heart o' him!--_Gang awa, and dinna dee
the like again_, was a' he said to that ane!--and ye may weel be sure
she never did! And noo she and Mary are followin, wi' yer ain Isy, i'
the vera futsteps o' the great shepherd, throuw the gowany leys o' the
New Jerus'lem--whaur it may be they ca' her Isy yet, as they ca' this
ane I hae to gang hame til."

"Ca' they her _that_, sir?--Eh, gar her come, gar her come! I wud fain
cry upo _Isy_ ance mair!--Sit ye doon, sir, shame upo' me!--and tak a
bite efter yer lang walk!--Will ye no bide the nicht wi' 's, and gang
back by the mornin's co'ch?"

"I wull that, mem--and thank ye kindly! I'm a bit fatiguit wi' the hill
ro'd, and the walk a wee langer than I'm used til.--Ye maun hae peety
upo my kittle temper, mem, and no drive me to ower muckle shame o'
myself!" he concluded, wiping his forehead.

"And to think," cried his hostess, "that my hard hert sud hae drawn sic
a word frae ane o' the Lord's servans that serve him day and nicht! I
beg yer pardon, and that richt heumbly, sir! I daurna say I'll never do
the like again, but I'm no sae likly to transgress a second time as the
first.--Lord, keep the doors o' my lips, that ill-faured words comena
thouchtless oot, and shame me and them that hear me!--I maun gang and
see aboot yer denner, sir! I s' no be lang."

"Yer gracious words, mem, are mair nor meat and drink to me. I could,
like Elijah, go i' the stren'th o' them--maybe something less than forty
days, but it wad be by the same sort o' stren'th as that angels'-food
gied the prophet!"

Marion hurried none the less for such a word; and soon the minister had
eaten his supper, and was seated in the cool of a sweet summer-evening,
in the garden before the house, among roses and lilies and poppy-heads
and long pink-striped grasses, enjoying a pipe with the farmer, who had
anticipated the hour for unyoking, and hurried home to have a talk with
Mr. Robertson. The minister opened wide his heart, and told them all he
knew and thought of Isy. And so prejudiced were they in her favour
by what he said of her, and the arguments he brought to show that the
judgment of the world was in her case tyrannous and false, that what
anxiety might yet remain as to the new relation into which they
were about to enter, was soon absorbed in hopeful expectation of her
appearance.

"But," he concluded, "you will have to be wise as serpents, lest aiblins
(_possibly_) ye kep (_intercept_) a lost sheep on her w'y back to the
shepherd, and gar her lie theroot (_out of doors_), exposed to the
prowlin wouf. Afore God, I wud rether share wi' her in _that_ day, nor
wi' them that keppit her!"

But when he reached home, the minister was startled, indeed dismayed by
the pallor that overwhelmed Isy's countenance when she heard, following
his assurance of the welcome that awaited her, the name and abode of her
new friends.

"They'll be wantin to ken a'thing!" she sobbed.

"Tell you them," returned the minister, "everything they have a right
to know; they are good people, and will not ask more. Beyond that, they
will respect your silence."

"There's but ae thing, as ye ken, sir, that I canna, and winna tell. To
haud my tongue aboot that is the ae particle o' honesty left possible to
me! It's enough I should have been the cause of the poor man's sin; and
I'm not going to bring upon him any of the consequences of it as well.
God keep the doors of my lips!"

"We will not go into the question whether you or he was the more to
blame," returned the parson; "but I heartily approve of your resolve,
and admire your firmness in holding to it. The time _may_ come when you
_ought_ to tell; but until then, I shall not even allow myself to wonder
who the faithless man may be."

Isy burst into tears.

"Don't call him that, sir! Don't drive me to doubt him. Don't let the
thought cross my mind that he could have helped doing nothing! Besides,
I deserve nothing! And for my bonny bairn, he maun by this time be back
hame to Him that sent him!"

Thus assured that her secret would be respected by those to whom she
was going, she ceased to show further reluctance to accept the shelter
offered her. And, in truth, underneath the dread of encountering James
Blatherwick's parents, lay hidden in her mind the fearful joy of a
chance of some day catching, herself unseen, a glimpse of the man whom
she still loved with the forgiving tenderness of a true, therefore
strong heart. With a trembling, fluttering bosom she took her place
on the coach beside Mr. Robertson, to go with him to the refuge he had
found for her.

Once more in the open world, with which she had had so much intercourse
that was other than joyous, that same world began at once to work the
will of its Maker upon her poor lacerated soul; and afar in its hidden
deeps the process of healing was already begun. Agony would many a time
return unbidden, would yet often rise like a crested wave, with menace
of overwhelming despair, but the Real, the True, long hidden from her
by the lying judgments of men and women, was now at length beginning to
reveal itself to her tear-blinded vision; Hope was lifting a feeble head
above the tangled weeds of the subsiding deluge; and ere long the girl
would see and understand how little cares the Father, whose judgment is
the truth of things, what at any time his child may have been or, done,
the moment that child gives herself up to be made what He would have
her! Looking down into the hearts of men, He sees differences there of
which the self-important world takes no heed; many that count themselves
of the first, He sees the last--and what He sees, alone _is_: a
gutter-child, a thief, a girl who never in this world had even a notion
of purity, may lie smiling in the arms of the Eternal, while the head
of a lordly house that still flourishes like a green bay-tree, may be
wandering about with the dogs beyond the walls of the city.

Out in the open world, I say, the power of the present God began at once
to work upon Isobel, for there, although dimly, she yet looked into
His open face, sketched vaguely in the mighty something we call
Nature--chiefly on the great vault we call Heaven, the _Upheaved_.
Shapely but undefined; perfect in form, yet limitless in depth; blue and
persistent, yet ever evading capture by human heart in human eye; this
sphere of fashioned boundlessness, of definite shapelessness, called up
in her heart the formless children of upheavedness--grandeur, namely,
and awe; hope, namely, and desire: all rushed together toward the dawn
of the unspeakable One, who, dwelling in that heaven, is above all
heavens; mighty and unchangeable, yet childlike; inexorable, yet tender
as never was mother; devoted as never yet was child save one. Isy,
indeed, understood little of all this; yet she wept, she knew not why;
and it was not for sorrow.

But when, the coach-journey over, she turned her back upon the house
where her child lay, and entered the desolate hill-country, a strange
feeling began to invade her consciousness. It seemed at first but an old
mood, worn shadowy; then it seemed the return of an old dream; then a
painful, confused, half-forgotten memory; but at length it cleared and
settled into a conviction that she had been in the same region before,
and had had, although a passing, yet a painful acquaintance with it; and
at the last she concluded that she must be near the very spot where she
had left and lost her baby. All that had, up to that moment, befallen
her, seemed fused in a troubled conglomerate of hunger and cold and
weariness, of help and hurt, of deliverance and returning pain: they all
mingled inextricably with the scene around her, and there condensed into
the memory of that one event--of which this must assuredly be the actual
place! She looked upon widespread wastes of heather and peat, great
stones here and there, half-buried in it, half-sticking out of it:
surely she was waiting there for something to come to pass! surely
behind this veil of the Seen, a child must be standing with outstretched
arms, hungering after his mother! In herself that very moment must
Memory be trembling into vision! At Length her heart's desire must be
drawing near to her expectant soul!

But suddenly, alas! her certainty of recollection, her assurance of
prophetic anticipation, faded from her, and of the recollection itself
remained nothing but a ruin! And all the time it took to dawn into
brilliance and fade out into darkness, had measured but a few weary
steps by the side of her companion, lost in the meditation of a glad
sermon for the next Sunday about the lost sheep carried home with
jubilance, and forgetting how unfit was the poor sheep beside him for
such a fatiguing tramp up hill and down, along what was nothing better
than the stony bed of a winter-torrent.

All at once Isy darted aside from the rough track, scrambled up the
steep bank, and ran like one demented into a great clump of heather,
which she began at once to search through and through. The minister
stopped bewildered, and stood to watch her, almost fearing for a moment
that she had again lost her wits. She got on the top of a stone in
the middle of the clump, turned several times round, gazed in every
direction over the moor, then descended with a hopeless look, and came
slowly back to him, saying--

"I beg your pardon, sir; I thought I had a glimpse of my infant through
the heather! This must be the very spot where I left him!"

The next moment she faltered feebly--

"Hae we far to gang yet, sir?" and before he could make her any answer,
staggered to the bank on the roadside, fell upon it, and lay still.

The minister immediately felt that he had been cruel in expecting her
to walk so far; he made haste to lay her comfortably on the short grass,
and waited anxiously, doing what he could to bring her to herself. He
could see no water near, but at least she had plenty of air!

In a little while she began to recover, sat up, and would have risen to
resume her journey. But the minister, filled with compunction, took her
up in his arms. They were near the crown of the ascent, and he could
carry her as far as that! She expostulated, but was unable to resist.
Light as she was, however, he found it no easy task to bear her up the
last of the steep rise, and was glad to set her down at the top--where
a fresh breeze was waiting to revive them both. She thanked him like
a child whose father had come to her help; and they seated themselves
together on the highest point of the moor, with a large, desolate land
on every side of them.

"Oh, sir, but ye _are_ good to me!" she murmured. "That brae just minded
me o' the Hill of Difficulty in the Pilgrim's Progress!"

"Oh, you know that story?" said the minister.

"My old grannie used to make me read it to her when she lay dying. I
thought it long and tiresome then, but since you took me to your house,
sir, I have remembered many things in it; I knew then that I was come to
the house of the Interpreter. You've made me understand, sir!"

"I am glad of that, Isy! You see I know some things that make me very
glad, and so I want them to make you glad too. And the thing that makes
me gladdest of all, is just that God is what he is. To know that such
a One is God over us and in us, makes of very being a most precious
delight. His children, those of them that know him, are all glad just
because he _is_, and they are his children. Do you think a strong man
like me would read sermons and say prayers and talk to people, doing
nothing but such shamefully easy work, if he did not believe what he
said?"

"I'm sure, sir, you have had hard enough work with me! I am a bad one
to teach! I thought I knew all that you have had such trouble to make
me see! I was in a bog of ignorance and misery, but now I am getting
my head up out of it, and seeing about me!--Please let me ask you one
thing, sir: how is it that, when the thought of God comes to me, I draw
back, afraid of him? If he be the kind of person you say he is, why
can't I go close up to him?"

"I confess the same foolishness, my child, _at times_," answered the
minister. "It can only be because we do not yet see God as he is--and
that must be because we do not yet really understand Jesus--do not see
the glory of God in his face. God is just like Jesus--exactly like him!"

And the parson fell a wondering how it could be that so many, gentle and
guileless as this woman-child, recoiled from the thought of the perfect
One. Why were they not always and irresistibly drawn toward the very
idea of God? Why, at least, should they not run to see and make sure
whether God was indeed such a one or not? whether he was really Love
itself--or only loved them after a fashion? It set him thinking afresh
about many things; and he soon began to discover that he had in fact
been teaching a good many things without _knowing_ them; for how could
he _know_ things that were not true, and therefore _could not_ be known?
He had indeed been _saying_ that God was Love, but he had yet been
teaching many things about him that were not lovable!

They sat thinking and talking, with silences between; and while they
thought and talked, the day-star was all the time rising unnoted in
their hearts. At length, finding herself much stronger, Isy rose, and
they resumed their journey.

The door stood open to receive them; but ere they reached it, a
bright-looking little woman, with delicate lines of ingrained red in a
sorrowful face, appeared in it, looking out with questioning eyes--like
a mother-bird just loosening her feet from the threshold of her nest to
fly and meet them. Through the film that blinded those expectant
eyes, Marion saw what manner of woman she was that drew nigh, and her
motherhood went out to her. For, in the love-witchery of Isy's yearning
look, humbly seeking acceptance, and in her hesitating approach
half-checked by gentle apology, Marion imagined she saw her own Isy
coming back from the gates of Death, and sprang to meet her. The
mediating love of the minister, obliterating itself, had made him linger
a step or two behind, waiting what would follow: when he saw the two
folded each in the other's arms, and the fountain of love thus break
forth at once from their encountering hearts, his soul leaped for joy of
the new-created love--new, but not the less surely eternal; for God
is Love, and Love is that which is, and was, and shall be for
evermore--boundless, unconditioned, self-existent, creative! "Truly,"
he said in himself, "God is Love, and God is all and in all! He is no
abstraction; he is the one eternal Individual God! In him Love evermore
breaks forth anew into fresh personality--in every new consciousness, in
every new child of the one creating Father. In every burning heart, in
everything that hopes and fears and is, Love is the creative presence,
the centre, the source of life, yea Life itself; yea, God himself!"

The elder woman drew herself a little back, held the poor white-faced
thing at arms'-length, and looked her through the face into the heart.

"My bonny lamb!" she cried, and pressed her again to her bosom. "Come
hame, and be a guid bairn, and ill man sall never touch ye, or gar ye
greit ony mair! There's _my_ man waitin for ye, to tak ye, and haud ye
safe!"

Isy looked up, and over the shoulder of her hostess saw the strong
paternal face of the farmer, full of silent welcome. For the strange
emotion that filled him he did not seek to account: he had nothing to do
with that; his will was lord over it!

"Come ben the hoose, lassie," he said, and led the way to the parlour,
where the red sunset was shining through the low gable window, filling
the place with the glamour of departing glory. "Sit ye doon upo the sofa
there; ye maun be unco tired! Surely ye haena come a' the lang ro'd frae
Tiltowie upo yer ain twa wee feet?"

"'Deed has she," answered the minister, who had followed them into the
room; "the mair shame to me 'at loot her dee 't!"

Marion lingered outside, wiping away the tears that would keep flowing.
For the one question, "What can be amiss wi' Jamie?" had returned upon
her, haunting and harrying her heart; and with it had come the idea,
though vague and formless, that their goodwill to the wandering outcast
might perhaps do something to make up for whatever ill thing Jamie might
have done. At last, instead of entering the parlour after them, she
turned away to the kitchen, and made haste to get ready their supper.

Isy sank back in the wide sofa, lost in relief; and the minister, when
he saw her look of conscious refuge and repose, said to himself--

"She is feeling as we shall all feel when first we know nothing near us
but the Love itself that was before all worlds!--when there is no doubt
more, and no questioning more!"

But the heart of the farmer was full of the old uncontent, the old
longing after the heart of his boy, that had never learned to cry
"_Father!_"

But soon they sat down to their meal. While they ate, hardly any one
spoke, and no one missed the speech or was aware of the silence, until
the bereaved Isobel thought of her child, and burst into tears. Then the
mother who sorrowed with such a different, and so much bitterer sorrow,
divining her thought and whence it came, rose, and from behind her
said--

"Noo ye maun jist come awa wi' me, and I s' pit ye til yer bed, and lea'
ye there!--Na, na; say gude nicht to naebody!--Ye'll see the minister
again i' the mornin!"

With that she took Isy away, half-carrying her close-pressed, and
half-leading her; for Marion, although no bigger than Isy, was much
stronger, and could easily have carried her.

That night both mothers slept well, and both dreamed of their mothers
and of their children. But in the morning nothing remained of their two
dreams except two hopes in the one Father.

When Isy entered the little parlour, she found she had slept so long
that breakfast was over, the minister smoking his pipe in the garden,
and the farmer busy in his yard. But Marion heard her, and brought her
breakfast, beaming with ministration; then thinking she would eat it
better if left to herself, went back to her work. In about five minutes,
however, Isy joined her, and began at once to lend a helping hand.

"Hoot, hoot, my dear!" cried her hostess, "ye haena taen time eneuch
to make a proaper brakfast o' 't! Gang awa back, and put mair intil ye.
Gien ye dinna learn to ate, we s' never get ony guid o' ye!"

"I just can't eat for gladness," returned Isy. "Ye're that good to me,
that I dare hardly think aboot it; it'll gar me greit!--Lat me help ye,
mem, and I'll grow hungry by dennertime!"

Mrs. Blatherwick understood, and said no more. She showed her what
she might set about; and Isy, happy as a child, came and went at
her commands, rejoicing. Probably, had she started in life with less
devotion, she might have fared better; but the end was not yet, and the
end must be known before we dare judge: result explains history. It is
enough for the present to say that, with the comparative repose of mind
she now enjoyed, with the good food she had, and the wholesome exercise,
for Mrs. Blatherwick took care she should not work too hard, with the
steady kindness shown her, and the consequent growth of her faith and
hope, Isy's light-heartedness first, and then her good looks began to
return; so that soon the dainty little creature was both prettier and
lovelier than before. At the same time her face and figure, her ways
and motions, went on mingling themselves so inextricably with Marion's
impressions of her vanished Isy, that at length she felt as if she
never could be able to part with her. Nor was it long before she assured
herself that she was equal to anything that had to be done in the house;
and that the experience of a day or two would make her capable of
the work of the dairy as well. Thus Isy and her mistress, for so Isy
insisted on regarding and calling her, speedily settled into their new
relation.

It did sometimes cross the girl's mind, and that with a sting of doubt,
whether it was fair to hide from her new friends the full facts of her
sorrowful history; but to quiet her conscience she had only to reflect
that for the sake of the son they loved, she must keep jealous guard
over her silence. Further than James's protection, she had no design,
cherished no scheme. The idea of compelling, or even influencing him to
do her justice, never once crossed her horizon. On the contrary, she was
possessed by the notion that she had done him a great wrong, and shrank
in horror from the danger of rendering it irretrievable. She had never
thought the thing out as between her and him, never even said to herself
that he too had been to blame. Her exaggerated notion of the share she
had in the fault, had lodged and got fixed in her mind, partly from
her acquaintance with the popular judgment concerning such as she, and
partly from her humble readiness to take any blame to herself. Even had
she been capable of comparing the relative consequences, the injury she
had done his prospects as a minister, would have seemed to her revering
soul a far greater wrong than any suffering or loss he had brought upon
her. For what was she beside him? What was the ruin of her life to the
frustration of such prospects as his? The sole alleviation of her
misery was that she seemed hitherto to have escaped involving him in the
results of her lack of self-restraint, which results, she was certain,
remained concealed from him, as from every one in any way concerned
with him in them. In truth, never was man less worthy of it, or more
devotedly shielded! And never was hidden wrong to the woman turned more
eagerly and persistently into loving service to the man's parents! Many
and many a time did the heart of James's mother, as she watched Isy's
deft and dainty motions, regret, even with bitterness, that such a
capable and love-inspiring girl should have rendered herself unworthy
of her son--for, notwithstanding what she regarded as the disparity of
their positions, she would gladly have welcomed Isy as a daughter, had
she but been spotless, and fit to be loved by him.

In the evenings, when the work of the day was done, Isy used to ramble
about the moor, in the lingering rays of the last of the sunset, and the
now quickly shortening twilight. In those hours unhasting, gentle, and
so spiritual in their tone that they seem to come straight from the
eternal spaces where is no recalling and no forgetting, where time and
space are motionless, and the spirit is at rest, Isy first began to read
with conscious understanding. For now first she fell into the company of
books--old-fashioned ones no doubt, but perhaps even therefore the more
fit for her, who was an old-fashioned, gentle, ignorant, thoughtful
child. Among the rest in the farmhouse, she came upon the two volumes
of a book called The Preceptor, which contained various treatises laying
down "the first principles of Polite Learning:" these drew her eager
attention; and with one or other of the not very handy volumes in her
hand, she would steal out of sight of the farm, and lapt in the solitude
of the moor, would sit and read until at last the light could reveal
not a word more. Even the Geometry she found in them attracted her not a
little; the Rhetoric and Poetry drew her yet more; but most of all, the
Natural History, with its engravings of beasts and birds, poor as they
were, delighted her; and from these antiquated repertories she gathered
much, and chiefly that most valuable knowledge, some acquaintance with
her own ignorance. There also, in a garret over the kitchen, she found
an English translation of Klopstock's Messiah, a poem which, in the
middle of the last and in the present century, caused a great excitement
in Germany, and did not a little, I believe, for the development of
religious feeling in that country, where the slow-subsiding ripple of
its commotion is possibly not altogether unfelt even at the present
day. She read the volume through as she strolled in those twilights, not
without risking many a fall over bush and stone ere practice taught her
to see at once both the way for her feet over the moor, and that for her
eyes over the printed page. The book both pleased and suited her, the
parts that interested her most being those about the repentant angel,
Abaddon; who, if I remember aright, haunted the steps of the Saviour,
and hovered about the cross while he was crucified. The great question
with her for a long time was, whether the Saviour must not have forgiven
him; but by slow degrees it became at last clear to her, that he who
came but to seek and to save the lost, could not have closed the door
against one that sought return to his fealty. It was not until she
knew the soutar, however, that at length she understood the tireless
redeeming of the Father, who had sent men blind and stupid and
ill-conditioned, into a world where they had to learn almost everything.

There were some few books of a more theological sort, which happily she
neither could understand nor was able to imagine she understood, and
which therefore she instinctively refused, as affording nourishment
neither for thought nor feeling. There was, besides, Dr. Johnson's
_Rasselas_, which mildly interested her; and a book called _Dialogues of
Devils_, which she read with avidity. And thus, if indeed her ignorance
did not become rapidly less, at least her knowledge of its existence
became slowly greater.

And all the time the conviction grew upon her, that she had been in
that region before, and that in truth she could not be far from the spot
where she laid her child down, and lost him.




CHAPTER XVIII


In the meantime the said child, a splendid boy, was the delight of the
humble dwelling to which Maggie had borne him in triumph. But the mind
of the soutar was not a little exercised as to how far their right in
the boy approached the paternal: were they justified in regarding him
as their love-property, before having made exhaustive inquiry as to who
could claim, and might re-appropriate him? For nothing could liberate
the finder of such a thing from the duty of restoring it upon demand,
seeing there could be no assurance that the child had been deliberately
and finally abandoned! Maggie, indeed, regarded the baby as absolutely
hers by right of rescue; but her father asked himself whether by
appropriating him she might not be depriving his mother of the one
remaining link between her and humanity, and so abandoning her helpless
to the Enemy. Surely to take and withhold from any woman her child,
must be to do what was possible toward dividing her from the unseen and
eternal! And he saw that, for the sake of his own child also, and the
truth in her, both she and he must make every possible endeavour to
restore the child to his mother.

So the next time that Maggie brought the crowing infant to the kitchen,
her father, who sat as usual under the small window, to gather upon his
work all the light to be had, said, with one quick glance at the child--

"Eh, the bonny, glaid cratur! Wha can say 'at sic as he, 'at haena the
twa in ane to see til them, getna frae Himsel a mair partic'lar and
carefu' regaird, gien that war poassible, than ither bairns! I would
fain believe that same!"

"Eh, father, but ye aye think bonny!" exclaimed Maggie. "Some hae been
dingin 't in upo me 'at sic as he maist aye turn oot onything but weel,
whan they step oot intil the warl. Eh, but we maun tak care o' 'im,
father! Whaur _would_ I be wi'oot you at my back!"

"And God at the back o' baith, bairn!" rejoined the soutar. "It's
thinkable that the Almichty may hae special diffeeculty wi sic as he,
but nane can jeedge o' ony thing or body till they see the hin'er en' o'
't a'. But I'm thinkin it maun aye be harder for ane that hasna his ain
mither to luik til. Ony ither body, be she as guid as she may, maun be
but a makshift!--For ae thing he winna get the same naitral disciplene
'at ilka mither cat gies its kitlins!"

"Maybe! maybe!--I ken I couldna ever lay a finger upo' the bonny cratur
mysel!" said Maggie.

"There 'tis!" returned her father. "And I dinna think," he went on, "we
could expec muckle frae the wisdom o' the mither o' 'm, gien she had
him. I doobt she micht turn oot to be but a makshift hersel! There's
mony aboot 'im 'at'll be sair eneuch upon 'im, but nane the wiser for
that! Mony ane'll luik upon 'im as a bairn in whause existence God has
had nae share--or jist as muckle share as gies him a grup o' 'im to gie
'im his licks! There's a heap o' mystery aboot a'thing, Maggie, and that
frae the vera beginnin to the vera en'! It may be 'at yon bairnie's i'
the waur danger jist frae haein you and me, Maggie! Eh, but I wuss his
ain mither war gien back til him! And wha can tell but she's needin him
waur nor he's needin her--though there maun aye be something he canna
get--'cause ye're no his ain mither, Maggie, and I'm no even his ain
gutcher!"

The adoptive mother burst into a howl.

"Father, father, ye'll brak the hert o' me!" she almost yelled, and laid
the child on the top of her father's hands in the very act of drawing
his waxed ends.

Thus changing him perforce from cobbler to nurse, she bolted from the
kitchen, and up the little stair; and throwing herself on her knees by
the bedside, sought, instinctively and unconsciously, the presence of
him who sees in secret. But for a time she had nothing to say even
to _him_, and could only moan on in the darkness beneath her closed
eyelids.

Suddenly she came to herself, remembering that she too had abandoned her
child: she must go back to him!

But as she ran, she heard loud noises of infantile jubilation, and
re-entering the kitchen, was amazed to see the soutar's hands moving as
persistently if not quite so rapidly as before: the child hung at the
back of the soutar's head, in the bight of the long jack-towel from
behind the door, holding on by the gray hair of his occiput. There
he tugged and crowed, while his care-taker bent over his labour,
circumspect in every movement, nor once forgetting the precious thing
on his back, who was evidently delighted with his new style of being
nursed, and only now and then made a wry face at some movement of the
human machine too abrupt for his comfort. Evidently he took it all as
intended solely for his pleasure.

Maggie burst out laughing through the tears that yet filled her eyes,
and the child, who could hear but not see her, began to cry a little,
so rousing the mother in her to a sense that he was being treated too
unceremoniously; when she bounded to liberate him, undid the towel, and
seated herself with him in her lap. The grandfather, not sorry to be
released, gave his shoulders a little writhing shake, laughed an amused
laugh, and set off boring and stitching and drawing at redoubled speed.

"Weel, Maggie?" he said, with loving interrogation, but without looking
up.

"I saw ye was richt, father, and it set me greitin sae sair that I
forgot the bairn, and you, father, as weel. Gang on, please, and say
what ye think fit: it's a' true!"

"There's little left for me to say, lassie, noo ye hae begun to say't to
yersel. But, believe me, though ye can never be the bairn's ain mither,
_she_ can never be til 'im the same ye hae been a'ready, whatever mair
or better may follow. The pairt ye hae chosen is guid eneuch never to be
taen frae ye--i' this warl or the neist!"

"Thank ye, father, for that! I'll dee for him what I can, ohn forgotten
that he's no mine but anither wuman's. I maunna tak frae her what's her
ain!"

The soutar, especially while at his work, was always trying "to get,"
as he said, "into his Lord's company,"--now endeavouring, perhaps, to
understand some saying of his, or now, it might be, to discover his
reason for saying it just then and there. Often, also, he would be
pondering why he allowed this or that to take place in the world, for it
was his house, where he was always present and always at work. Humble as
diligent disciple, he never doubted, when once a thing had taken place,
that it was by his will it came to pass, but he saw that evil itself,
originating with man or his deceiver, was often made to subserve the
final will of the All-in-All. And he knew in his own self that much must
first be set right there, before the will of the Father could be done in
earth as it was in heaven. Therefore in any new development of feeling
in his child, he could recognize the pressure of a guiding hand in the
formation of her history; and was able to understand St. John where he
says, "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear
what we shall be, but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall
be like him, for we shall see him as he is." For first, foremost, and
deepest of all, he positively and absolutely believed in the man whose
history he found in the Gospel: that is, he believed not only that
such a man once was, and that every word he then spoke was true, but he
believed that that man was still in the world, and that every word
he then spoke, had always been, still was, and always would be true.
Therefore he also believed--which was more both to the Master and to
John MacLear, his disciple--that the chief end of his conscious life
must be to live in His presence, and keep his affections ever, afresh
and constantly, turning toward him in hope and aspiration. Hence every
day he felt afresh that he too was living in the house of God, among the
things of the father of Jesus.

The life-influence of the soutar had already for some time, and in some
measure, been felt at Tiltowie. In a certain far-off way, men seemed to
surmise what he was about, although they were, one and all, unable to
estimate the nature or value of his pursuit. What their idea of him was,
may in a measure be gathered from the answer of the village-fool to the
passer-by who said to him: "Weel, and what's yer soutar aboot the noo?"
"Ow, as usual," answered the _natural_, "turnin up ilka muckle stane to
luik for his maister aneth it!" For in truth he believed that the Lord
of men was very often walking to and fro in the earthly kingdom of his
Father, watching what was there going on, and doing his best to bring it
to its true condition; that he was ever and always in the deepest sense
present in the same, where he could, if he pleased, at any moment or in
any spot, appear to whom he would. Never did John MacLear lift his eyes
heavenward without a vague feeling that he might that very moment, catch
a sight of the glory of his coming Lord; if ever he fixed his eyes on
the far horizon, it was never without receiving a shadowy suggestion
that, like a sail towering over the edge of the world, the first great
flag of the Lord's hitherward march might that moment be rising between
earth and heaven;--for certainly He would come unawares, and then who
could tell what moment He might not set his foot on the edge of the
visible, and come out of the dark in which He had hitherto clothed
himself as with a garment--to appear in the ancient glory of his
transfiguration! Thus he was ever ready to fall a watching--and thus,
also, never did he play the false prophet, with cries of "Lo here!" and
"Lo there!" And even when deepest lost in watching, the lowest whisper
of humanity seemed always loud enough to recall him to his "work
alive"--lest he should be found asleep at His coming. His was the same
live readiness that had opened the ear of Maggie to the cry of the
little one on the hill-side. As his daily work was ministration to the
weary feet of his Master's men, so was his soul ever awake to their
sorrows and spiritual necessities.

"There's a haill warl' o' bonny wark aboot me!" he would say. "I hae but
to lay my han' to what's neist me, and it's sure to be something that
wants deein! I'm clean ashamt sometimes, whan I wauk up i' the mornin,
to fin' mysel deein naething!"

Every evening while the summer lasted, he would go out alone for a walk,
generally toward a certain wood nigh the town; for there lay, although
it was of no great extent, and its trees were small, a probability
of escaping for a few moments from the eyes of men, and the chance of
certain of another breed showing themselves.

"No that," he once said to Maggie, "I ever cared vera muckle aboot the
angels: it's the man, the perfec man, wha was there wi' the Father afore
ever an angel was h'ard tell o', that sen's me upo my knees! Whan I see
a man that but minds me o' _Him_, my hert rises wi' a loup, as gien it
wad 'maist lea' my body ahint it.--Love's the law o' the universe, and
it jist works amazin!"

One day a man, seeing him approach in the near distance, and knowing he
had not perceived his presence, lay down behind a great stone to watch
"the mad soutar," in the hope of hearing him say something insane. As
John came nearer, the man saw his lips moving, and heard sounds issue
from them; but as he passed, nothing was audible but the same words
repeated several times, and with the same expression of surprise and joy
as if at something for the first time discovered:--"Eh, Lord! Eh, Lord,
I see! I un'erstaun'!--Lord, I'm yer ain--to the vera deith!--a' yer
ain!--Thy father bless thee, Lord!--I ken ye care for noucht else!--Eh,
but my hert's glaid!--that glaid, I 'maist canna speyk!"

That man ever after spoke of the soutar with a respect that resembled
awe.

After that talk with her father about the child and his mother, a
certain silent change appeared in Maggie. People saw in her face an
expression which they took to resemble that of one whose child was ill,
and was expected to die. But what Maggie felt was only resignation to
the will of her Lord: the child was not hers but the Lord's, lent to her
for a season! She must walk softly, doing everything for him as under
the eye of the Master, who might at any moment call to her, "Bring the
child: I want him now!" And she soon became as cheerful as before, but
never after quite lost the still, solemn look as of one in the eternal
spaces, who saw beyond this world's horizon. She talked less with her
father than hitherto, but at the same time seemed to live closer to him.
Occasionally she would ask him to help her to understand something he
had said; but even then he would not always try to make it plain; he
might answer--

"I see, lassie, ye're no just ready for 't! It's true, though; and the
day maun come whan ye'll see the thing itsel, and ken what it is; and
that's the only w'y to win at the trowth o' 't! In fac', to see a thing,
and ken the thing, and be sure it's true, is a' ane and the same thing!"
Such a word from her father was always enough to still and content the
girl.

Her delight in the child, instead of growing less, went on increasing
because of the _awe_, rather than _dread_ of having at last to give him
up.




CHAPTER XIX.


Meanwhile the minister remained moody, apparently sunk in contemplation,
but in fact mostly brooding, and meditating neither form nor truth.
Sometimes he felt indeed as if he were losing altogether his power of
thinking--especially when, in the middle of the week, he sat down to
find something to say on the Sunday. He had greatly lost interest in the
questions that had occupied him while he was yet a student, and imagined
himself in preparation for what he called the ministry--never thinking
how one was to minister who had not yet learned to obey, and had never
sought anything but his own glorification! It was little wonder he
should lose interest in a profession, where all was but profession! What
pleasure could that man find in holy labour who, not indeed offered his
stipend to purchase the Holy Ghost, but offered all he knew of the Holy
Ghost to purchase popularity? No wonder he should find himself at length
in lack of talk to pay for his one thing needful! He had always been
more or less dependent on commentaries for the joint he provided--and
even for the cooking of it: was it any wonder that his guests should
show less and less appetite for his dinners?

   The hungry sheep looked up and were not fed!

To have food to give them, he must think! To think, he must have peace!
to have peace, he must forget himself! to forget himself, he must
repent, and walk in the truth! to walk in the truth, he must love God
and his neighbour!--Even to have interest in the dry bone of criticism,
which was all he could find in his larder, he must broil it--and so burn
away in the slow fire of his intellect, now dull and damp enough from
lack of noble purpose, every scrap of meat left upon it! His last
relation to his work, his fondly cherished intellect, was departing from
him, to leave him lord of a dustheap! In the unsavoury mound he grubbed
and nosed and scraped dog-like, but could not uncover a single fragment
that smelt of provender. The morning of Saturday came, and he recognized
with a burst of agonizing sweat, that he dared not even imagine his
appearance before his congregation: he had not one written word to read
to them; and extempore utterance was, from conscious vacancy, impossible
to him; he could not even call up one meaningless phrase to articulate!
He flung his concordance sprawling upon the floor, snatched up his hat
and clerical cane, and, scarce knowing what he did, presently found
himself standing at the soutar's door, where he had already knocked,
without a notion of what he was come to seek. The old parson, generally
in a mood to quarrel with the soutar, had always walked straight into
his workshop, and greeted him crouched over his work; but the new parson
always waited on the doorstep for Maggie to admit him.

She had opened the door wide ere he knew why he had come, or could think
of anything to say. And now he was in greater uneasiness than usual at
the thought of the cobbler's deep-set black eyes about to be fixed upon
him, as if to probe his very thoughts.

"Do you think your father would have time," he asked humbly, "to measure
me for a pair of light boots?"

Mr. Blatherwick was very particular about his foot-gear, and had
hitherto always fitted himself at Deemouth; but he had at length
learned that nothing he could there buy approached in quality, either
of material or workmanship, what the soutar supplied to his poorest
customer: he would mend anything worth mending, but would never _make_
anything inferior.

"Ye'll get what ye want at such and such place," he would answer, "and
I doobtna it'll be as guid as can be made at the siller; but for my ain
pairt, ye maun excuse me!"

"'Deed, sir, he'll be baith glad and prood to mak ye as guid a pair o'
beets as he can compass," answered Maggie. "Jist step in here, sir, and
lat him ken what ye want. My bairn's greitin, and I maun gang til 'im;
it's seldom he cries oot!"

The minister walked in at the open door of the kitchen, and met the eyes
of the soutar expectant.

"Ye're welcome, sir!" said MacLear, and returned his eyes to what he had
for a moment interrupted.

"I want you to make me a nice pair of boots, if you please," said the
parson, as cheerily as he could. "I am rather particular about the fit,
I fear!"

"And what for no, sir?" answered the soutar. "I'll do what I can
onygait, I promise ye--but wi' mair readiness nor confidence as to the
fit; for I canna profess assurance o' fittin' the first time, no haein
the necessar instinc' frae the mak' o' the man to the shape o' the fut,
sir."

"Of course I should like to have them both neat and comfortable," said
the parson.

"In coorse ye wad, sir, and sae would I! For I confess I wad fain hae my
customers tak note o' my success in followin the paittern set afore me
i' the first oreeginal fut!"

"But you will allow, I suppose, that a foot is seldom as perfect now
as when the divine idea of the member was first embodied by its maker?"
rejoined the minister.

"Ow, ay; there's been mony an interferin circumstance; but whan His
kingdom's come, things 'll tak a turn for the redemption o' the feet
as weel as the lave o' the body--as the apostle Paul says i' the
twenty-third verse o' the aucht chapter o' his epistle to the
Romans;--only I'm weel aveesed, sir, 'at there's no sic a thing as
_adoption_ mintit at i' the original Greek. That can hae no pairt i'
what fowk ca's the plan o' salvation--as gien the consumin fire o' the
Love eternal was to be ca'd a _plan_! Hech, minister, it scunners me!
But for the fut, it's aye perfec' eneuch to be _my_ pattern, for it's
the only ane I hae to follow! It's Himsel sets the shape o' the shune
this or that man maun weir!"

"That's very true--and the same applies to everything a man cannot help.
A man has both the make of his mind and of his circumstances to do the
best he can with, and sometimes they don't seem to fit each other--so
well as, I hope, your boots will fit my feet."

"Ye're richt there, sir--only that no man's bun' to follow his
inclinations or his circumstances, ony mair than he's bun' to alter his
fut to the shape o' a ready-made beet!--But hoo wull ye hae them made,
sir?--I mean what sort o' butes wad ye hae me mak?"

"Oh, I leave that to you, Mr. MacLear!--a sort of half Wellington, I
suppose--a neat pair of short boots."

"I understand, sir."

"And now tell me," said the minister, moved by a sudden impulse, coming
he knew not whence, "what you think of this new fad, if it be nothing
worse, of the English clergy--I mean about the duty of confessing to the
priest.--I see they have actually prevailed upon that wretched creature
we've all been reading about in the papers lately, to confess the murder
of her little brother! Do you think they had any right to do that?
Remember the jury had acquitted her."

"And has she railly confessed? I _am_ glaid o' that! I only wuss they
could get a haud o' Madeline Smith as weel, and persuaud _her_ to
confess! Eh, the state o' that puir crater's conscience! It 'maist gars
me greit to think o' 't! Gien she wad but confess, houp wad spring to
life in her sin-oppressed soul! Eh, but it maun be a gran' lichtenin to
that puir thing! I'm richt glaid to hear o' 't."

"I didn't know, Mr. MacLear, that you favoured the power and influence
of the priesthood to such an extent! We Presbyterian clergy are not in
the way of doing the business of detectives, taking upon us to act as
the agents of human justice! There is no one, guilty or not, but is safe
with us!"

"As with any confessor, Papist or Protestant," rejoined the soutar. "If
I understand your news, sir, it means that they persuaded the poor soul
to confess her guilt, and so put herself safe in the hands of God!"

"And is not that to come between God and the sinner?"

"Doubtless, sir--in order to bring them together; to persuade the sinner
to the first step toward reconciliation with God, and peace in his own
mind."

"That he could take without the intervention of the priest!"

"Yes, but not without his own consenting will! And in this case, she
would not, and did not confess without being persuaded to it!"

"They had no right to threaten her!"

"Did they threaten her? If they did, they were wrong.--And yet I don't
know! In any case they did for her the very best thing that could be
done! For they did get her, you tell me, to confess--and so cast from
her the horror of carrying about in her secret heart the knowledge of an
unforgiven crime! Christians of all denominations hold, I presume, that,
to be forgiven, a sin must be confessed!"

"Yes, to God--that is enough! No mere man has a right to know the sins
of his neighbour!"

"Not even the man against whom the sin was committed?"

"Suppose the sin has never come abroad, but remains hidden in the heart,
is a man bound to confess it? Is he, for instance, bound to tell his
neighbour that he used to hate him, and in his heart wish him evil?"

"The time micht come whan to confess even that would ease a man's hert!
but in sic a case, the man's first duty, it seems to me, would be to
watch for an opportunity o' doin that neebour a kin'ness. That would
be the deid blow to his hatred! But where a man has done an act o'
injustice, a wrang to his neebour, he has no ch'ice, it seems to me, but
confess it: that neebour is the one from whom first he has to ask and
receive forgiveness; and that neebour alone can lift the burden o' 't
aff o' him! Besides, the confession may be but fair, to baud the blame
frae bein laid at the door o' some innocent man!--And the author o' nae
offence can affoord to forget," ended the soutar, "hoo the Lord said,
'There's naething happit-up, but maun come to the licht'!"

It seems to me that nothing could have led the minister so near the
presentation of his own false position, except the will of God working
in him to set him free. He continued, driven by an impulse he neither
understood nor suspected--

"Suppose the thing not known, however, or likely to be known, and
that the man's confession, instead of serving any good end, would only
destroy his reputation and usefulness, bring bitter grief upon those who
loved him, and nothing but shame to the one he had wronged--what would
you say then?--You will please to remember, Mr. MacLear, that I am
putting an entirely imaginary case, for the sake of argument only!"

"Eh, but I doobt--I doobt yer imaiginary case!" murmured the soutar to
himself, hardly daring even to think his thought clearly, lest somehow
it might reveal itself.

"In that case," he replied, "it seems to me the offender wad hae to cast
aboot him for ane fit to be trustit, and to him reveal the haill affair,
that he may get his help to see and do what's richt: it maks an unco
differ to luik at a thing throuw anither man's een, i' the supposed
licht o' anither man's conscience! The wrang dune may hae caused mair
evil, that is, mair injustice, nor the man himsel kens! And what's the
reputation ye speak o', or what's the eesefu'ness o' sic a man? Can it
be worth onything? Isna his hoose a lee? isna it biggit upo the san'?
What kin' o' a usefulness can that be that has hypocrisy for its
fundation? Awa wi' 't! Lat him cry oot to a' the warl', 'I'm a
heepocrit! I'm a worm, and no man!' Lat him cry oot to his makker, 'I'm
a beast afore thee! Mak a man o' me'!"

As the soutar spoke, overcome by sympathy with the sinner, whom he could
not help feeling in bodily presence before him, the minister, who had
risen when he began to talk about the English clergy and confession,
stood hearing with a face pale as death.

"For God's sake, minister," continued the soutar, "gien ye hae ony sic
thing upo yer min', hurry and oot wi' 't! I dinna say _to me_, but to
somebody--to onybody! Mak a clean breist o' 't, afore the Adversary has
ye again by the thrapple!"

But here started awake in the minister the pride of superiority in
station and learning: a shoemaker, from whom he had just ordered a pair
of boots, to take such a liberty, who ought naturally to have regarded
him as necessarily spotless! He drew himself up to his lanky height, and
made reply--

"I am not aware, Mr. MacLear, that I have given you any pretext for
addressing me in such terms! I told you, indeed, that I was putting
a case, a very possible one, it is true, but not the less a merely
imaginary one! You have shown me how unsafe it is to enter into an
argument on any supposed case with one of limited education! It is my
own fault, however; and I beg your pardon for having thoughtlessly led
you into such a pitfall!--Good morning!"

As the door closed behind the parson, he began to felicitate himself
on having so happily turned aside the course of a conversation whose
dangerous drift he seemed now first to recognize; but he little thought
how much he had already conveyed to the wide-eyed observation of one
well schooled in the symptoms of human unrest.

"I must set a better watch over my thoughts lest they betray me!" he
reflected; thus resolving to conceal himself yet more carefully from the
one man in the place who would have cut for him the snare of the fowler.

"I was ower hasty wi' 'im!" concluded the soutar on his part. "But I
think the truth has some grup o' 'im. His conscience is waukin up, I
fancy, and growlin a bit; and whaur that tyke has ance taen haud, he's
no ready to lowsen or lat gang! We maun jist lie quaiet a bit, and see!
His hoor 'ill come!"

The minister being one who turned pale when angry, walked home with a
face of such corpse-like whiteness, that a woman who met him said to
herself, "What can ail the minister, bonny laad! He's luikin as scared
as a corp! I doobt that fule body the soutar's been angerin him wi' his
havers!"

The first thing he did when he reached the manse, was to turn,
nevertheless, to the chapter and verse in the epistle to the Romans,
which the soutar had indicated, and which, through all his irritation,
had, strangely enough, remained unsmudged in his memory; but the passage
suggested nothing, alas! out of which he could fabricate a sermon. Could
it have proved otherwise with a heart that was quite content to have God
no nearer him than a merely adoptive father? He found at the same time
that his late interview with the soutar had rendered the machinery of
his thought-factory no fitter than before for weaving a tangled wisp of
loose ends, which was all he could command, into the homogeneous web of
a sermon; and at last was driven to his old stock of carefully preserved
preordination sermons; where he was unfortunate enough to make choice
of the one least of all fitted to awake comprehension or interest in his
audience.

His selection made, and the rest of the day thus cleared for inaction,
he sat down and wrote a letter. Ever since his fall he had been
successfully practising the art of throwing a morsel straight into
one or other of the throats of the triple-headed Cerberus, his
conscience--which was more clever in catching such sops, than they were
in choking the said howler; and one of them, the letter mentioned, was
the sole wretched result of his talk with the soutar. Addressed to a
late divinity-classmate, he asked in it incidentally whether his
old friend had ever heard anything of the little girl--he could just
remember her name and the pretty face of her--Isy, general slavey to
her aunt's lodgers in the Canongate, of whom he was one: he had often
wondered, he said, what had become of her, for he had been almost in
love with her for a whole half-year! I cannot but take the inquiry as
the merest pretence, with the sole object of deceiving himself into the
notion of having at least made one attempt to discover Isy. His friend
forgot to answer the question, and James Blatherwick never alluded to
his having put it to him.




CHAPTER XX


Never dawned Sunday upon soul more wretched. He had not indeed to climb
into his watchman's tower without the pretence of a proclamation, but on
that very morning his father had put the mare between the shafts of the
gig to drive his wife to Tiltowie and their son's church, instead of the
nearer and more accessible one in the next parish, whither they oftener
went. Arrived there, it was not wonderful they should find themselves
so dissatisfied with the spiritual food set before them, as to wish
heartily they had remained at home, or driven to the nearer church.
The moment the service was over, Mr. Blatherwick felt much inclined to
return at once, without waiting an interview with his son; for he had no
remark to make on the sermon that would be pleasant either for his son
or his wife to hear; but Marion combated the impulse with entreaties
that grew almost angry, and Peter was compelled to yield, although
sullenly. They waited in the churchyard for the minister's appearance.

"Weel, Jeemie," said his father, shaking hands with him limply, "yon
was some steeve parritch ye gied us this mornin!--and the meal itsel was
baith auld and soor!"

The mother gave her son a pitiful smile, as if in deprecation of her
husband's severity, but said not a word; and James, haunted by the taste
of failure the sermon had left in his own mouth, and possibly troubled
by sub-conscious motions of self-recognition, could hardly look his
father in the face, and felt as if he had been rebuked by him before all
the congregation.

"Father," he replied in a tone of some injury, "you do not know how
difficult it is to preach a fresh sermon every Sunday!"

"Ca' ye yon fresh, Jeemie? To me it was like the fuistit husks o' the
half-faimisht swine! Man, I wuss sic provender would drive yersel whaur
there's better and to spare! Yon was lumps o' brose in a pig-wash o'
stourum! The tane was eneuch to choke, and the tither to droon ye!"

James made a wry face, and the sight of his annoyance broke the ice
gathering over the well-spring in his mother's heart; tears rose in her
eyes, and for one brief moment she saw the minister again her bairn.
But he gave her no filial response; ambition, and greed of the praise of
men, had blocked in him the movements of the divine, and corrupted his
wholesomest feelings, so that now he welcomed freely as a conviction the
suggestion that his parents had never cherished any sympathy with him
or his preaching; which reacted in a sudden flow of resentment, and a
thickening of the ice on his heart. Some fundamental shock must dislodge
that rooted, overmastering ice, if ever his wintered heart was to feel
the power of a reviving Spring!

The threesum family stood in helpless silence for a few moments; then
the father said to the mother--

"I doobt we maun be settin oot for hame, Mirran!"

"Will you not come into the manse, and have something before you go?"
said James, not without anxiety lest his housekeeper should be taken at
unawares, and their acceptance should annoy her: he lived in constant
dread of offending his housekeeper!

"Na, I thank ye," returned his father: "it wad taste o' stew!" (_blown
dust_).

It was a rude remark; but Peter was not in a kind mood; and when love
itself is unkind, it is apt to be burning and bitter and merciless.

Marion burst into tears. James turned away, and walked home with a gait
of wounded dignity. Peter went in haste toward the churchyard gate, to
interrupt with the bit his mare's feed of oats. Marion saw his hands
tremble pitifully as he put the headstall over the creature's ears, and
reproached herself that she had given him such a cold-hearted son. She
climbed in a helpless way into the gig, and sat waiting for her husband.

"I'm that dry 'at I could drink cauld watter!" he said, as he took his
place beside her.

They drove from the place of tombs, but they carried death with them,
and left the sunlight behind them.

Neither spoke a word all the way. Not until she was dismounting at their
own door, did the mother venture her sole remark, "Eh, sirs!" It meant
a world of unexpressed and inexpressible misery. She went straight up to
the little garret where she kept her Sunday bonnet, and where she said
her prayers when in especial misery. Thence she descended after a
while to her bedroom, there washed her face, and sadly prepared for
a hungerless encounter with the dinner Isy had been getting ready for
them--hoping to hear something about the sermon, perhaps even some
little word about the minister himself. But Isy too must share in the
disappointment of that vainly shining Sunday morning! Not a word passed
between her master and mistress. Their son was called the pastor of the
flock, but he was rather the porter of the sheepfold than the shepherd
of the sheep. He was very careful that the church should be properly
swept and sometimes even garnished; but about the temple of the Holy
Ghost, the hearts of his sheep, he knew nothing, and cared as little.
The gloom of his parents, their sense of failure and loss, grew and
deepened all the dull hot afternoon, until it seemed almost to pass
their endurance. At last, however, it abated, as does every pain, for
life is at its root: thereto ordained, it slew itself by exhaustion.
"But," thought the mother, "there's Monday coming, and what am I to
do then?" With the new day would return the old trouble, the gnawing,
sickening pain that she was childless: her daughter was gone, and no
son was left her! Yet the new day when it came, brought with it its new
possibility of living one day more!

But the minister was far more to be pitied than those whose misery he
was. All night long he slept with a sense of ill-usage sublying his
consciousness, and dominating his dreams; but with the sun came a doubt
whether he had not acted in unseemly fashion, when he turned and left
his father and mother in the churchyard. Of course they had not treated
him well; but what would his congregation, some of whom might have been
lingering in the churchyard, have thought, to see him leave them as he
did? His only thought, however, was to take precautions against their
natural judgment of his behaviour.

After his breakfast, he set out, his custom of a Monday morning, for
what he called a quiet stroll; but his thoughts kept returning, ever
with fresh resentment, to the soutar's insinuation--for such he counted
it--on the Saturday. Suddenly, uninvited, and displacing the phantasm of
her father, arose before him the face of Maggie; and with it the sudden
question, What then was the real history of the baby on whom she spent
such an irrational amount of devotion. The soutar's tale of her finding
him was too apocryphal! Might not Maggie have made a slip? Or why should
the pretensions of the soutar be absolutely trusted? Surely he had, some
time or other, heard a rumour! A certain satisfaction arose with the
suggestion that this man, so ready to believe evil of his neighbour, had
not kept his own reputation, or that of his house, perhaps, undefiled.
He tried to rebuke himself the next moment, it is true, for having
harboured a moment's satisfaction in the wrong-doing of another: it was
unbefitting the pastor of a Christian flock! But the thought came and
came again, and he took no continuous trouble to cast it out. When he
went home, he put a question or two to his housekeeper about the little
one, but she only smiled paukily, and gave him no answer.

After his two-o'clock dinner, he thought it would be Christian-like to
forgive his parents: he would therefore call at Stonecross--which would
tend to wipe out any undesirable offence on the minds of his parents,
and also to prevent any gossip that might injure him in his sacred
profession! He had not been to see them for a long time; his visits to
them gave him no satisfaction; but he never dreamed of attributing that
to his own want of cordiality. He judged it well, however, to avoid any
appearance of evil, and therefore thought it might be his duty to pay
them in future a hurried call about once a month. For the past, he
excused himself because of the distance, and his not being a good
walker! Even now that he had made up his mind he was in no haste to set
out, but had a long snooze in his armchair first: it was evening when he
climbed the hill and came in sight of the low gable behind which he was
born.

Isy was in the garden gathering up the linen she had spread to dry on
the bushes, when his head came in sight at the top of the brae. She knew
him at once, and stooping behind the gooseberries, fled to the back of
the house, and so away to the moor. James saw the white flutter of a
sheet, but nothing of the hands that took it. He had heard that his
mother had a nice young woman to help her in the house, but cherished so
little interest in home-affairs that the news waked in him no curiosity.

Ever since she came to Stonecross, Isy had been on the outlook lest
James should unexpectedly surprise her, and so he himself surprised into
an involuntary disclosure of his relation to her; and not even by
the long deferring of her hope to see him yet again, had she come to
pretermit her vigilance. She did not intend to avoid him altogether,
only to take heed not to startle him into any recognition of her in the
presence of his mother. But when she saw him approaching the house, her
courage failed her, and she fled to avoid the danger of betraying
both, herself and him. She was in truth ashamed of meeting him, in her
imagination feeling guiltily exposed to his just reproaches. All the
time he remained that evening with his mother, she kept watching the
house, not once showing herself until he was gone, when she reappeared
as if just returned from the moor, where Mrs. Blatherwick imagined
her still indulging the hope of finding her baby, concerning whom her
mistress more than doubted the very existence, taking the supposed fancy
for nothing but a half-crazy survival from the time of her insanity
before the Robertsons found her.

The minister made a comforting peace with his mother, telling her a
part of the truth, namely, that he had been much out of sorts during the
week, and quite unable to write a new sermon; and that so he had been
driven at the very last to take an old one, and that so hurriedly that
he had failed to recall correctly the subject and nature of it; that
he had actually begun to read it before finding that it was altogether
unsuitable--at which very moment, fatally for his equanimity, he
discovered his parents in the congregation, and was so dismayed that he
could not recover his self-possession, whence had ensued his apparent
lack of cordiality! It was a lame, yet somewhat plausible excuse, and
served to silence for the moment, although it was necessarily so far
from satisfying his mother's heart. His father was out of doors, and him
James did not see.




CHAPTER XXI


As time went on, the terror of discovery grew rather than abated in the
mind of the minister. He could not tell whence or why it should be so,
for no news of Isy reached him, and he felt, in his quieter moments,
almost certain that she could not have passed so completely out of his
horizon, if she were still in the world. When most persuaded of this,
he felt ablest to live and forget the past, of which he was unable to
recall any portion with satisfaction. The darkness and silence left over
it by his unrepented offence, gave it, in his retrospect, a threatening
aspect--out of which at any moment might burst the hidden enemy, the
thing that might be known, and must not be known! He derived, however,
a feeble and right cowardly comfort from the reflection that he had done
nothing to hide the miserable fact, and could not now. He even persuaded
himself that if he could he _would_ not do anything now to keep it
secret; he would leave all to that Providence which seemed hitherto
to have wrought on his behalf: he would but keep a silence which no
gentleman must break!--And why should that come abroad which Providence
itself concealed? Who had any claim to know a mere passing fault, which
the partner in it must least of all desire exposed, seeing it would fall
heavier upon her than upon him? Where was any call for that confession,
about which the soutar had maundered so foolishly? If, on the other
hand, his secret should threaten to creep out, he would not, he
flattered himself, move a finger to keep it hidden! he would that moment
disappear in some trackless solitude, rejoicing that he had nothing
left to wish undisclosed! As to the charge of hypocrisy that was sure to
follow, he was innocent: he had never said anything he did not believe!
he had made no professions beyond such as were involved in his position!
he had never once posed as a man of Christian experience--like the
soutar for instance! Simply and only he had been overtaken in a fault,
which he had never repeated, never would repeat, and which he was
willing to atone for in any way he could!

On the following Saturday, the soutar was hard at work all day long
on the new boots the minister had ordered of him, which indeed he had
almost forgotten in anxiety about the man for whom he had to make them.
For MacLear was now thoroughly convinced that the young man had "some
sick offence within his mind," and was the more anxious to finish his
boots and carry them home the same night, that he knew his words had
increased the sickness of that offence, which sickness might be the
first symptom of returning health. For nothing attracted the soutar more
than an opportunity of doing anything to lift from a human soul, were
it but a single fold of the darkness that compassed it, and so let the
light nearer to the troubled heart. As to what it might be that was
harassing the minister's soul, he sternly repressed in himself all
curiosity. The thought of Maggie's precious little foundling did indeed
once more occur to him, but he tried all he could to shut it out. He did
also desire that the minister should confess, but he had no wish that
he should unbosom himself to him: from such a possibility, indeed, he
shrank; while he did hope to persuade him to seek counsel of some one
capable of giving him true advice. He also hoped that, his displeasure
gradually passing, he would resume his friendly intercourse with
himself; for somehow there was that in the gloomy parson which
powerfully attracted the cheery and hopeful soutar, who hoped his
troubled abstraction might yet prove to be heart-hunger after a
spiritual good which he had not begun to find: he might not yet have
understood, he thought, the good news about God--that he was just
what Jesus seemed to those that saw the glory of God in his face. The
minister could not, the soutar thought, have learned much of the truth
concerning God; for it seemed to wake in him no gladness, no power of
life, no strength to _be_. For _him_ Christ had not risen, but lay wrapt
in his winding sheet! So far as James's feeling was concerned, the larks
and the angels must all be mistaken in singing as they did!

At an hour that caused the soutar anxiety as to whether the housekeeper
might not have retired for the night, he rang the bell of the
manse-door; which in truth did bring the minister himself from his
study, to confront MacLear on the other side of the threshold, with the
new boots in his hand.

But the minister had come to see that his behaviour in his last visit to
the soutar must have laid him open to suspicion from him; and he was now
bent on removing what he counted the unfortunate impression his words
might have made. Wishing therefore to appear to cherish no offence over
his parishioner's last words to him ere they parted, and so obliterate
any suggestion of needed confession lurking behind his own words with
which he had left him, he now addressed him with an _abandon_ which,
gloomy in spirit as he habitually was, he could yet assume in a moment
when the masking instinct was aroused in him--

"Oh, Mr. MacLear," he said jocularly, "I am glad you have just managed
to escape breaking the Sabbath! You have had a close shave! It wants ten
minutes, hardly more, to the awful midnight hour!"

"I doobt, sir, it would hae broken the Sawbath waur, to fail o' my word
for the sake o' a steik or twa that maittered naething to God or man!"
returned the soutar.

"Ah, well, we won't argue about it! but if we were inclined to be
strict, the Sabbath began some "--here he looked at his watch--"some
five hours and three-quarters ago; that is, at six of the clock, on the
evening of Saturday!"

"Hoot, minister, ye ken ye're wrang there! for, Jew-wise, it began at
sax o' the Friday nicht! But ye hae made it plain frae the poopit that
ye hae nae supperstition aboot the first day o' the week, the whilk
alane has aucht to dee wi' hiz Christians!--We're no a' Jews, though
there's a heap o' them upo' this side the Tweed! I, for my pairt,
confess nae obligation but to drap workin, and sit doon wi' clean han's,
or as clean as I can weel mak them, to the speeritooal table o' my Lord,
whaur I aye try as weel to weir a clean and a cheerfu' face--that
is, sae far as the sermon will permit--and there's aye a pyke o' mate
somewhaur intil 't! For isna it the bonny day whan the Lord wad hae us
sit doon and ait wi himsel, wha made the h'avens and the yirth, and the
waters under the yirth that haud it up! And wilna he, upo this day, at
the last gran' merridge-feast, poor oot the bonny reid wine, and say,
'Sit ye doon, bairns, and tak o' my best'!"

"Ay, ay, Mr. MacLear; that's a fine way to think of the Sabbath!"
rejoined the minister, "and the very way I am in the habit of thinking
of it myself!--I'm greatly obliged to you for bringing home my boots;
but indeed I could have managed very well without them!"

"Ay, sir, maybe; I dinna doobt ye hae pairs and pairs o' beets; but ye
see _I_ couldna dee _wi'oot_ them, for I had _promised_."

The word struck the minister to the heart. "He means something!" he said
to himself. "--But I never promised the girl anything! I _could_ not
have done it! I never thought of such a thing! I never said anything to
bind me!"

He never saw that, whether he had promised or not, his deed had bound
him more absolutely than any words.

All this time he was letting the soutar stand on the doorstep, with the
new boots in his hand.

"Come in," he said at last, "and put them there in the window. It's
about time we were all going to bed, I think--especially myself,
to-morrow being sermon-day!"

The soutar betook himself to his home and to bed, sorry that he had said
nothing, yet having said more than he knew.

The next evening he listened to the best sermon he had yet heard from
that pulpit--a summary of the facts bearing on the resurrection of our
Lord;--with which sermon, however, a large part of the congregation was
anything but pleased; for the minister had admitted the impossibility of
reconciling, in every particular, the differing accounts of the doings
and seeings of those who bore witness to it.

"--As gien," said the soutar, "the Lord wasna to shaw himsel till a'
that had seen he was up war agreed as to their recollection o' what fouk
had reportit!"

He went home edified and uplifted by his fresh contemplation of the
story of his Master's victory: thank God! he thought; his pains were
over at last! and through death he was lord for ever over death and
evil, over pain and loss and fear, who was already through his father
lord of creation and life, and of all things visible and invisible! He
was Lord also of all thinking and feeling and judgment, able to give
repentance and restoration, and to set right all that selfwill had set
wrong! So greatly did the heart of his humble disciple rejoice in him,
that he scandalized the reposing sabbath-street, by breaking out, as he
went home, into a somewhat unmelodious song, "They are all gone down to
hell with the weapons of their war!" to a tune nobody knew but himself,
and which he could never have sung again. "O Faithful and True," he
broke out once more as he reached his own house; but checked
himself abruptly, saying, "Tut, tut, the fowk'll think I hae been
drinkin'!--Eh," he continued to himself as he went in, "gien I micht but
ance hear the name that no man kens but Himsel!"

The next day he was very tired, and could get through but little
work; so, on the Tuesday he felt it would be right to take a holiday.
Therefore he put a large piece of oatcake in his pocket, and telling
Maggie he was going to the hills, "to do nae thing and a'thing, baith at
ance, a' day," disappeared with a backward look and lingering smile.

He went brimful of expectation, and was not disappointed in those he met
by the way.

After walking some distance in quiescent peace, and having since
noontide met no one--to use his own fashion of speech--by which he meant
that no special thought had arisen uncalled-for in his mind, always
regarding such a thought as a word direct from the First Thought, he
turned his steps toward Stonecross. He had known Peter Blatherwick for
many years, and honoured him as one in whom there was no guile; and now
the desire to see him came upon him: he wanted to share with him the
pleasure and benefit he had gathered from Sunday's sermon, and show the
better quality of the food their pastor had that day laid before his
sheep. He knocked at the door, thinking to see the mistress, and hear
from her where her husband was likely to be found; but to his surprise,
the farmer came himself to the door, where he stood in silence, with a
look that seemed to say, "I know you; but what can you be wanting with
me?" His face was troubled, and looked not only sorrowful, but scared
as well. Usually ruddy with health, and calm with content, it was now
blotted with pallid shades, and seemed, as he held the door-handle
without a word of welcome, that of one aware of something unseen behind
him.

"What ails ye, Mr. Bletherwick?" asked the soutar, in a voice that
faltered with sympathetic anxiety. "Surely--I houp there's naething come
ower the mistress!"

"Na, I thank ye; she's vera weel. But a dreid thing has befa'en her and
me. It's little mair nor an hoor sin syne 'at oor Isy--ye maun hae h'ard
tell o' Isy, 'at we baith had sic a fawvour for--a' at ance she jist
drappit doon deid as gien shotten wi' a gun! In fac I thoucht for a
meenut, though I h'ard nae shot, that sic had been the case. The ae
moment she steed newsin wi' her mistress i' the kitchie, and the neist
she was in a heap upo' the fleer o' 't!--But come in, come in."

"Eh, the bonnie lassie!" cried the shoemaker, without moving to enter;
"I min' upo' her weel, though I believe I never saw her but ance!--a
fine, delicat pictur o' a lassie, that luikit up at ye as gien she made
ye kin'ly welcome to onything she could gie or get for ye!"

"Aweel, as I'm tellin ye," said the farmer, "she's awa'; and we'll see
her no more till the earth gies up her deid! The wife's in there wi'
what's left o' her, greitin as gien she wad greit her een oot. Eh, but
she lo'ed her weel:--Doon she drappit, and no even a moment to say her
prayers!"

"That maitters na muckle--no a hair, in fac!" returned the soutar. "It
was the Father o' her, nane ither, that took her. He wantit her hame;
and he's no are to dee onything ill, or at the wrang moment! Gien a
meenut mair had been ony guid til her, thinkna ye she wud hae had that
meenut!"

"Willna ye come in and see her? Some fowk canna bide to luik upo the
deid, but ye're no are o' sic!"

"Na; it's trowth I daurna be nane o' sic. I s' richt wullinly gang wi'
ye to luik upo the face o' ane 'at's won throuw!"

"Come awa' than; and maybe the Lord 'ill gie ye a word o' comfort for
the mistress, for she taks on terrible aboot her. It braks my hert to
see her!"

"The hert o' baith king and cobbler's i' the ae han' o' the Lord,"
answered the soutar solemnly; "and gien my hert indite onything, my
tongue 'ill be ready to speyk the same."

He followed the farmer--who trode softly, as if he feared disturbing the
sleeper--upon whom even the sudden silences of the world would break no
more.

Mr. Blatherwick led the way to the parlour, and through it to a closet
behind, used as the guest-chamber. There, on a little white bed with
dimity curtains, lay the form of Isobel. The eyes of the soutar, in whom
had lingered yet a hope, at once revealed that he saw she was indeed
gone to return no more. Her lovely little face, although its beautiful
eyes were closed, was even lovelier than before; but her arms and hands
lay straight by her sides; their work was gone from them; no voice would
call her any more! she might sleep on, and take her rest!

"I had but to lay them straucht," sobbed her mistress; "her een she had
closed hersel as she drappit! Eh, but she _was_ a bonny lassie--and a
guid!--hardly less nor ain bairn to me!"

"And to me as weel!" supplemented Peter, with a choked sob.

"And no ance had I paid her a penny wage!" cried Marion, with sudden
remorseful reminiscence.

"She'll never think o' wages noo!" said her husband. "We'll sen' them to
the hospital, and that'll ease yer min', Mirran!"

"Eh, she was a dacent, mensefu, richt lo'able cratur!" cried Marion.
"She never _said_ naething to jeedge by, but I hae a glimmer o' houp 'at
she _may_ ha' been ane o' the Lord's ain."

"Is that a' ye can say, mem?" interposed the soutar. "Surely ye wadna
daur imaigine her drappit oot o' _his_ han's!"

"Na," returned Marion; "but I wad richt fain ken her fair intil them!
Wha is there to assure 's o' her faith i' the atonement?"

"Deed, I kenna, and I carena, mem! I houp she had faith i' naething,
thing nor thoucht, but the Lord himsel! Alive or deid, we're in his
han's wha dee'd for us, revealin his Father til 's," said the soutar;
"--and gien she didna ken Him afore, she wull noo! The holy All-in-all
be wi' her i' the dark, or whatever comes!--O God, hand up her heid, and
latna the watters gang ower her!"

So-called Theology rose, dull, rampant, and indignant; but the solemn
face of the dead interdicted dispute, and Love was ready to hope, if not
quite to believe. Nevertheless to those guileless souls, the words of
the soutar sounded like blasphemy: was not her fate settled, and for
ever? Had not death in a moment turned her into an immortal angel, or
an equally immortal devil? Only how, at such a moment, with the peaceful
face before them, were they to argue the possibility that she, the
loving, the gentle, whose fault they knew but by her own voluntary
confession, was now as utterly indifferent to the heart of the living
God, as if He had never created her--nay even had become hateful to
him! No one spoke; and the soutar, after gazing on the dead for a
while, prayer overflowing his heart, but never reaching his lips, turned
slowly, and departed without a word.

As he reached his own door, he met the minister, and told him of the
sorrow that had befallen his parents, adding that it was plain they were
in sore need of his sympathy. James, although marvelling at their being
so much troubled by the death of merely a servant, was roused by the
tale to the duty of his profession; and although his heart had never
yet drawn him either to the house of mourning or the house of mirth,
he judged it becoming to pay another visit to Stonecross, thinking it,
however, rather hard that he should have to go again so soon. It pleased
the soutar to see him face about at once, however, and start for the
farm with a quicker stride than, since his return to Tiltowie as its
minister, he had seen him put forth.

James had not the slightest foreboding of whom he was about to see in
the arms of Death. But even had he had some feeling of what was
awaiting him, I dare not even conjecture the mood in which he would
have approached the house--whether one of compunction, or of relief.
But utterly unconscious of the discovery toward which he was rushing,
he hurried on, with a faint pleasure at the thought of having to
expostulate with his mother upon the waste of such an unnecessary
expenditure of feeling. Toward his father, he was aware of a more
active feeling of disapproval, if not indeed one of repugnance. James
Blatherwick was of such whose sluggish natures require, for the melting
of their stubbornness, and their remoulding into forms of strength
and beauty, such a concentration of the love of God that it becomes a
consuming fire.




CHAPTER XXII


The night had fallen when he reached the farm. The place was silent; its
doors were all shut; and when he opened the nearest, seldom used but for
the reception of strangers, not a soul was to be seen; no one came to
meet him, for no one had even thought of him, and certainly no one,
except it were the dead, desired his coming. He went into the parlour,
and there, from the dim chamber beyond, whose door stood open, appeared
his mother. Her heart big with grief, she clasped him in her arms, and
laid her cheek against his bosom: higher she could not reach, and
nearer than his breast-bone she could not get to him. No endearment
was customary between them: James had never encouraged or missed any;
neither did he know how to receive such when offered.

"I am distressed, mother," he began, "to see you so upset; and I cannot
help thinking such a display of feeling unnecessary. If I may say so, it
seems to me unreasonable. You cannot, in such a brief period as this new
maid of yours has spent with you, have developed such an affection for
her, as this--" he hesitated for a word, "--as this _bouleversement_
would seem to indicate! The young woman can hardly be a relative, or
I should surely have heard of her existence! The suddenness of the
occurrence, of which I heard only from my shoemaker, MacLear, must have
wrought disastrously upon your nerves! Come, come, dear mother! you must
indeed compose yourself! It is quite unworthy of you, to yield to such a
paroxysm of unnatural and uncalled-for grief! Surely it is the part of a
Christian like you, to meet with calmness, especially in the case of one
you have known so little, that inevitable change which neither man
nor woman can avoid longer than a few years at most! Of course, the
appalling instantaneousness of it in the present case, goes far to
explain and excuse your emotion, but now at least, after so many hours
have elapsed, it is surely time for reason to resume her sway! Was
it not Schiller who said, 'Death cannot be an evil, for it is
universal'?--At all events, it is not an unmitigated evil!" he
added--with a sigh, as if for his part he was prepared to welcome it.

During this prolonged and foolish speech, the gentle woman, whose
mother-heart had loved the poor girl that bore her daughter's name, had
been restraining her sobs behind her handkerchief; but now, as she heard
her son's cold commonplaces, it was, perhaps, a little wholesome anger
that roused her, and made her able to speak.

"Ye didna ken her, laddie," she cried, "or ye wad never mint at layin
yer tongue upon her that gait!--'Deed na, ye wadna!--But I doobt gien
ever ye could hae come to ken her as she was--sic a bonny, herty sowl
as ance dwalt in yon white-faced, patient thing, lyin i' the chaumer
there--wi' the stang oot o' her hert at last, and left the sharper i'
mine! But me and yer father--eh, weel we lo'ed her! for to hiz she was
like oor ain Isy,--ay, mair a dochter nor a servan--wi'a braw lovin
kin'ness in her, no to be luikit for frae ony son, and sic as we never
had frae ony afore but oor ain Isy.--Jist gang ye intil the closet
there, gien ye wull, and ye'll see what'll maybe saften yer hert a bit,
and lat ye unerstan' what mak o' a thing's come to the twa auld fowk ye
never cared muckle aboot!"

James felt bitterly aggrieved by this personal remark of his mother. How
unfair she was! What had _he_ ever done to offend her? Had he not always
behaved himself properly--except indeed in that matter of which neither
she, nor living soul else, knew anything, or would ever know! What
right had she then to say such things to him! Had he not fulfilled
the expectations with which his father sent him to college? had he not
gained a position whose reflected splendour crowned them the parents of
James Blatherwick? She showed him none of the consideration or respect
he had so justly earned but never demanded! He rose suddenly, and
with never a thought save to leave his mother so as to manifest his
displeasure with her, stalked heedlessly into the presence of the more
heedless dead.

The night had indeed fallen, but, the little window of the room looking
westward, and a bar of golden light yet lying like a resurrection
stone over the spot where the sun was buried, a pale sad gleam, softly
vanishing, hovered, hardly rested, upon the lovely, still, unlooking
face, that lay white on the scarcely whiter pillow. Coming out of the
darker room, the sharp, low light blinded him a little, so that he saw
without any certainty of perception; yet he seemed to have something
before him not altogether unfamiliar, giving him a suggestion as of
something he had known once, perhaps ought now to recognize, but had
forgotten: the reality of it seemed to be obscured by the strange
autumnal light entering almost horizontally. Concluding himself oddly
affected by the sight of a room he had regarded with some awe in his
childhood, and had not set foot in it for a long time, he drew a
little nearer to the bed, to look closer at the face of this paragon
of servants, whose loss was causing his mother a sorrow so unreasonably
poignant.

The sense of her resemblance to some one grew upon him; but not yet had
he begun to recognize the death-changed countenance; he became assured
only that he _had_ seen that still face before, and that, would she but
open those eyes, he should know at once who she was.

Then the true suspicion flashed upon him: good God! _could it be_ the
dead Isy? Of course not! It was the merest illusion! a nonsensical
fancy, caused by the irregular mingling of the light and darkness! In
the daytime he could not have been so befooled by his imagination! He
had always known the clearness, both physical and mental, with which
he saw everything! Nevertheless, the folly had power to fix him staring
where he stood, with his face leant close to the face of the dead. It
was only like, it could not be the same! and yet he could not turn and
go from it! Why did he not, by the mere will in whose strength he took
pride, force his way out of the room? He stirred not a foot; he stared
and stood. And as he stared, the dead face seemed to come nearer him
through the darkness, growing more and more like the only girl he had
ever, though even then only in fancy, loved. If it was not she, how
could the dead look so like the living he had once known? At length
what doubt was left, changed suddenly to assurance that it must be she.
And--dare I say it?--it brought him a sense of relief! He breathed a
sigh of such false, rascally peace as he had not known since his sin,
and with that sigh he left the room. Passing his mother, who still wept
in the now deeper dusk of the parlour, with the observation that there
was no moon, and it would be quite dark before he reached the manse, he
bade her good-night, and went out.

When Peter, who unable to sit longer inactive had gone to the stable,
re-entered, foiled in the attempt to occupy himself, and sat down by his
wife, she began to talk about the funeral preparations, and the persons
to be invited. But such sorrow overtook him afresh, that even his wife,
herself inconsolable over her loss, was surprised at the depth of his
grief for one who was no relative. It seemed to him indelicate, almost
heartless of her to talk so soon of burying the dear one but just gone
from their sight: it was unnecessary dispatch, and suggested a lack of
reverence!

"What for sic a hurry?" he expostulated. "Isna there time eneuch to put
oot o' yer sicht what ye ance lo'ed sae weel? Lat me be the nicht; the
morn 'ill be here sene eneuch! Lat my sowl rest a moment wi' deith, and
haud awa wi yer funeral. 'Sufficient til the day,' ye ken!"

"Eh dear, but I'm no like you, Peter! Whan the sowl's gane, I tak no
content i' the presence o' the puir worthless body, luikin what it never
mair can be! Na, I wad be rid o' 't, I confess!--But be it as ye wull,
my ain man! It's a sair hert ye hae as weel as me i' yer body this
nicht; and we maun beir ane anither's burdens! The dauty may lie as we
hae laid her, the nicht throuw, and naething said: there's little to be
dene for her; she's a bonny clean corp as ever was, and may weel lie a
week afore we put her awa'!--There's no need for ony to watch her; tyke
nor baudrins 'ill never come near her.--I hae aye won'ert what for fowk
wad sit up wi the deid: yet I min' me weel they aye did i' the auld
time."

In this she showed, however, and in this alone, that the girl she
lamented was not her own daughter; for when the other Isy died, her body
was never for a moment left with the eternal spaces, as if she might
wake, and be terrified to find herself alone. Then, as if God had
forgotten them, they went to bed without saying their usual prayers
together: I fancy the visit of her son had been to Marion like the chill
of a wandering iceberg.

In the morning the farmer, up first as usual, went into the
death-chamber and sat down by the side of the bed, reproaching himself
that he had forgotten "worship" the night before.

And as he sat looking at the white face, he became aware of what might
be a little tinge of colour--the faintest possible--upon the lips.
He knew it must be a fancy, or at best an accident without
significance--for he had heard of such a thing! Still, even if his eyes
were deceiving him, he must shrink from hiding away such death out of
sight! The merest counterfeit of life was too sacred for burial! Just
such might the little daughter of Jairus have looked when the Lord took
her by the hand ere she arose!

Thus feeling, and thus seeming to see on the lips of the girl a doubtful
tinge of the light of life, it was no wonder that Peter could not
entertain the thought of her immediate burial. They must at least wait
some sign, some unmistakable proof even, of change begun!

Instead, therefore, of going into the yard to set in motion the needful
preparations for the harvest at hand, he sat on with the dead: he could
not leave her until his wife should come to take his place and keep
her company! He brought a bible from the next room, sat down again, and
waited beside her. In doubtful, timid, tremulous hope, not worthy of the
name of hope--a mere sense of a scarcely possible possibility, he waited
what he would not consent to believe he waited for. He would not deceive
himself; he would give his wife no hint, but wait to see how she saw!
He would put to her no leading question even, but watch for any start or
touch of surprise she might betray!

By and by Marion appeared, gazed a moment on the dead, looked pitifully
in her husband's face, and went out again.

"She sees naething!" said Peter to himself. "I s' awa' to my
wark!--Still I winna hae her laid aside afore I'm a wheen surer o' what
she is--leevin sowl or deid clod!"

With a sad sense of vanished self-delusion, he rose and went out. As he
passed through the kitchen, his wife followed him to the door. "Ye'll
see and sen' a message to the vricht _(carpenter)_ the day?" she
whispered.

"I'm no likly to forget!" he answered; "but there's nae hurry, seem
there's no life concernt!"

"Na, nane; the mair's the pity!" she answered; and Peter knew, with a
glad relief, that his wife was coming to herself from the terrible blow.

She sent the cowboy to the Cormacks' cottage, to tell Eppie to come to
her.

The old woman came, heard what details there were to the sad story,
shook her head mournfully, and found nothing to say; but together they
set about preparing the body for burial. That done, the mind of
Mrs. Blatherwick was at ease, and she sat expecting the visit of the
carpenter. But the carpenter did not come.

On the Thursday morning the soutar came to inquire after his friends at
Stanecross, and the gudewife gave him a message to Willie Wabster, the
_vricht_, to see about the coffin.

But the soutar, catching sight of the farmer in the yard, went and had
a talk with him; and the result was that he took no message to the
carpenter; and when Peter went in to his dinner, he still said there was
no hurry: why should she be so anxious to heap earth over the dead?
For still he saw, or fancied he saw, the same possible colour on Isy's
cheek--like the faintest sunset-red, or that in the heart of the palest
blush-rose, which is either glow or pallor as you choose to think it. So
the first week of Isy's death passed, and still she lay in state, ready
for the grave, but unburied.

Not a few of the neighbours came to see her, and were admitted where she
lay; and some of them warned Marion that, when the change came, it would
come suddenly; but still Peter would not hear of her being buried "with
that colour on her cheek!" And Marion had come to see, or to imagine
with her husband that she saw the colour. So, each in turn, they kept
watching her: who could tell but the Lord might be going to work a
miracle for them, and was not in the meantime only trying them, to see
how long their patience and hope would endure!

The report spread through the neighbourhood, and reached Tiltowie, where
it speedily pervaded street and lane:--"The lass at Stanecross, she's
lyin deid, and luikin as alive as ever she was!" From street and lane
the people went crowding to see the strange sight, and would have
overrun the house, but had a reception by no means cordial: the farmer
set men at every door, and would admit no one. Angry and ashamed, they
all turned and went--except a few of the more inquisitive, who continued
lurking about in the hope of hearing something to carry home and enlarge
upon.

As to the minister, he insisted upon disbelieving the whole thing, and
yet was made not a little uncomfortable by the rumour. Such a foe to
superstition that in his mind he silently questioned the truth of all
records of miracles, to whomsoever attributed, he was yet haunted by a
fear which he dared not formulate. Of course, whatever might take place,
it could be no miracle, but the mere natural effect of natural causes!
none the less, however, did he dread what might happen: he feared Isy
herself, and what she might disclose! For a time he did not dare again
go near the place. The girl might be in a trance! she might revive
suddenly, and call out his name! She might even reveal all! She had
always been a strange girl! What if, indeed, she were even being now
kept alive to tell the truth, and disgrace him before all the world!
Horrible as was the thought, might it not be well, in view of the
possibility of her revival, that he should be present to hear anything
she might say, and take precaution against it? He resolved, therefore,
to go to Stonecross, and make inquiry after her, heartily hoping to find
her undoubtedly and irrecoverably dead.

In the meantime, Peter had been growing more and more expectant, and had
nearly forgotten all about the coffin, when a fresh rumour came to
the ears of William Webster, the coffin-maker, that the young woman at
Stonecross was indeed and unmistakably gone; whereupon he, having lost
patience over the uncertainty that had been crippling his operations,
questioned no more what he had so long expected, set himself at once
to his supposed task, and finished what he had already begun and indeed
half ended. The same night that the minister was on his way to the
farm, he passed Webster and his man carrying the coffin home through
the darkness: he descried what it was, and his heart gave a throb of
satisfaction. The men reaching Stonecross in the pitch-blackness of a
gathering storm, they stupidly set up their burden on end by the first
door, and went on to the other, where they made a vain effort to convey
to the deaf Eppie a knowledge of what they had done. She making them no
intelligible reply, there they left the coffin leaning up against the
wall; and, eager to get home ere the storm broke upon them, set off at
what speed was possible to them on the rough and dark road to Tiltowie,
now in their turn meeting and passing the minister on his way.

By the time James arrived at Stonecross, it was too dark for him to see
the ghastly sentinel standing at the nearer door. He walked into the
parlour; and there met his father coming from the little chamber where
his wife was seated.

"Isna this a most amazin thing, and houpfu' as it's amazing?" cried his
father. "What _can_ there be to come oot o' 't? Eh, but the w'ys o'
the Almichty are truly no to be mizzered by mortal line! The lass maun
surely be intendit for marvellous things, to be dealt wi' efter sic an
extra-ordnar fashion! Nicht efter nicht has the tane or the tither o'
hiz twa been sittin here aside her, lattin the hairst tak its chance,
and i' the daytime lea'in 'maist a' to the men, me sleepin and they at
their wark; and here the bonny cratur lyin, as quaiet as gien she had
never seen tribble, for thirteen days, and no change past upon her, no
more than on the three holy bairns i' the fiery furnace! I'm jist in a
trimle to think what's to come oot o' 't a'! God only kens! we can but
sit still and wait his appearance! What think ye, Jeemie?--Whan the Lord
was deid upo' the cross, they waitit but twa nichts, and there he was up
afore them! here we hae waitit, close on a haill fortnicht--and naething
even to pruv that she's deid! still less ony sign that ever she'll speyk
word til's again!--What think ye o' 't, man?"

"Gien ever she returns to life, I greatly doobt she'll ever bring
back her senses wi' her!" said the mother, joining them from the inner
chamber.

"Hoot, ye min' the tale o' the lady--Lady Fanshawe, I believe they ca'd
her? She cam til hersel a' richt i' the en'!" said Peter.

"I don't remember the story," said James. "Such old world tales are
little to be heeded."

"I min' naething aboot it but jist that muckle," said his father. "And I
can think o' naething but that bonny lassie lyin there afore me naither
deid nor alive! I jist won'er, Jeames, that ye're no as concernt, and as
fillt wi' doobt and even dreid anent it as I am mysel!"

"We're all in the hands of the God who created life and death," returned
James, in a pious tone.

The father held his peace.

"And He'll bring licht oot o' the vera dark o' the grave!" said the
mother.

Her faith, or at least her hope, once set agoing, went farther than her
husband's, and she had a greater power of waiting than he. James had
sorely tried both her patience and her hope, and not even now had she
given him up.

"Ye'll bide and share oor watch this ae nicht, Jeames?" said Peter.
"It's an elrische kin o' a thing to wauk up i' the mirk mids, wi' a deid
corp aside ye!--No 'at even yet I gie her up for deid! but I canna help
feelin some eerie like--no to say fleyt! Bide, man, and see the nicht
oot wi' 's, and gie yer mither and me some hert o' grace."

James had little inclination to add another to the party, and began to
murmur something about his housekeeper. But his mother cut him short
with the indignant remark--

"Hoot, what's _she_?--Naething to you or ony o' 's! Lat her sit up for
ye, gien she likes! Lat her sit, I say, and never waste thoucht upo' the
queyn!"

James had not a word to answer. Greatly as he shrank from the ordeal, he
must encounter it without show of reluctance! He dared not even propose
to sit in the kitchen and smoke. With better courage than will, he
consented to share their vigil. "And then," he reflected, "if she should
come to herself, there would be the advantage he had foreseen and even
half desired!"

His mother went to prepare supper for them. His father rose, and saying
he would have a look at the night, went toward the door; for even
his strange situation could not entirely smother the anxiety of the
husbandman. But James glided past him to the door, determined not to be
left alone with that thing in the chamber.

But in the meantime the wind had been rising, and the coffin had been
tilting and resettling on its narrower end. At last, James opening the
door, the gruesome thing fell forward just as he crossed the threshold,
knocked him down, and settled on the top of him. His father, close
behind him, tumbled over the obstruction, divined, in the light of a
lamp in the passage, what the prostrate thing was, and scrambling to his
feet with the only oath he had, I fully believe, ever uttered, cried:
"Damn that fule, Willie Wabster! Had he naething better to dee nor
sen' to the hoose coffins naebody wantit--and syne set them doon like
rotten-traps _(rat-traps)_ to whomel puir Jeemie!" He lifted the thing
from off the minister, who rose not much hurt, but both amazed and
offended at the mishap, and went to his mother in the kitchen.

"Dinna say muckle to yer mither, Jeames laad," said his father as
he went; "that is, dinna explain preceesely hoo the ill-faured thing
happent. _I'll_ hae amen's _(amends, vengeance)_ upon him!" So saying,
he took the offensive vehicle, awkward burden as it was, in his two
arms, and carrying it to the back of the cornyard, shoved it over the
low wall into the dry ditch at its foot, where he heaped dirty straw
from the stable over it.

"It'll be lang," he vowed to himsel, "or Willie Wabster hear the last
o' this!--and langer yet or he see the glint o' the siller he thoucht
he was yirnin by 't!--It's come and cairry 't hame himsel he sall, the
muckle idiot! He may turn 't intil a breid-kist, or what he likes, the
gomf!"

"Fain wud I screw the reid heid o' 'im intil that same kist, and
hand him there, short o' smorin!" he muttered as he went back to the
house.--"Faith, I could 'maist beery him ootricht!" he concluded, with a
grim smile.

Ere he re-entered the house, however, he walked a little way up the
hill, to cast over the vault above him a farmer's look of inquiry as to
the coming night, and then went in, shaking his head at what the clouds
boded.

Marion had brought their simple supper into the parlour, and was sitting
there with James, waiting for him. When they had ended their meal,
and Eppie had removed the remnants, the husband and wife went into the
adjoining chamber and sat down by the bedside, where James presently
joined them with a book in his hand. Eppie, having _rested_ the fire in
the kitchen, came into the parlour, and sat on the edge of a chair just
inside the door.

Peter had said nothing about the night, and indeed, in his wrath with
the carpenter, had hardly noted how imminent was the storm; but the air
had grown very sultry, and the night was black as pitch, for a solid
mass of cloud had blotted out the stars: it was plain that, long before
morning, a terrible storm must break. But midnight came and went, and
all was very still.

Suddenly the storm was upon them, with a forked, vibrating flash of
angry light that seemed to sting their eyeballs, and was replaced by a
darkness that seemed to crush them like a ponderous weight. Then all at
once the weight itself seemed torn and shattered into sound--into heaps
of bursting, roaring, tumultuous billows. Another flash, yet another and
another followed, each with its crashing uproar of celestial avalanches.
At the first flash Peter had risen and gone to the larger window of
the parlour, to discover, if possible, in what direction the storm was
travelling. Marion, feeling as if suddenly unroofed, followed him, and
James was left alone with the dead. He sat, not daring to move; but when
the third flash came, it flickered and played so long about the dead
face, that it seemed for minutes vividly visible, and his gaze was
fixed on it, fascinated. The same moment, without a single preparatory
movement, Isy was on her feet, erect on the bed.

A great cry reached the ears of the father and mother. They hurried into
the chamber: James lay motionless and senseless on the floor: a man's
nerve is not necessarily proportioned to the hardness of his heart! The
verity of the thing had overwhelmed him.

Isobel had fallen, and lay gasping and sighing on the bed. She knew
nothing of what had happened to her; she did not yet know herself--did
not know that her faithless lover lay on the floor by her bedside.

When the mother entered, she saw nothing--only heard Isy's breathing.
But when her husband came with a candle, and she saw her son on the
floor, she forgot Isy; all her care was for James. She dropped on her
knees beside him, raised his head, held it to her bosom, and lamented
over him as if he were dead. She even felt annoyed with the poor girl's
moaning, as she struggled to get back to life. Why should she whose
history was such, be the cause of mishap to her reverend and honoured
son? Was she worth one of his little fingers! Let her moan and groan and
sigh away there--what did it matter! she could well enough wait a bit!
She would see to her presently, when her precious son was better!

Very different was the effect upon Peter when he saw Isy coming to
herself. It was a miracle indeed! It could be nothing less! White as was
her face, there was in it an unmistakable look of reviving life! When
she opened her eyes and saw her master bending over her, she greeted
him with a faint smile, closed her eyes again, and lay still. James also
soon began to show signs of recovery, and his father turned to him.

With the old sullen look of his boyhood, he glanced up at his mother,
still overwhelming him with caresses and tears.

"Let me up," he said querulously, and began to wipe his face. "I feel so
strange! What can have made me turn so sick all at once?"

"Isy's come to life again!" said his mother, with modified show of
pleasure.

"Oh!" he returned.

"Ye're surely no sorry for that!" rejoined his mother, with a reaction
of disappointment at his lack of sympathy, and rose as she said it.

"I'm pleased to hear it--why not?" he answered. "But she gave me a
terrible start! You see, I never expected it, as you did!"

"Weel, ye _are_ hertless, Jeernie!" exclaimed his father. "Hae ye nae
spark o' fellow-feelin wi' yer ain mither, whan the lass comes to
life 'at she's been fourteen days murnin for deid? But losh! she's aff
again!--deid or in a dwaum, I kenna!--Is't possible she's gaein to slip
frae oor hand yet?"

James turned his head aside, and murmured something inaudibly.

But Isy had only fainted. After some eager ministrations on the part of
Peter, she came to herself once more, and lay panting, her forehead wet
as with the dew of death.

The farmer ran out to a loft in the yard, and calling the herd-boy, a
clever lad, told him to rise and ride for the doctor as fast as the mare
could lay feet to the road.

"Tell him," he said, "that Isy has come to life, and he maun munt and
ride like the vera mischeef, or she'll be deid again afore he wins til
her. Gien ye canna get the tae doctor, awa wi' ye to the tither, and
dinna ley him till ye see him i' the saiddle and startit. Syne ye can
ease the mere, and come hame at yer leisur; he'll be here lang afore
ye!--Tell him I'll pey him ony fee he likes, be't what it may, and never
compleen!--Awa' wi' ye like the vera deevil!"

"I didna think ye kenned hoo _he_ rade," answered the boy pawkily, as
he shot to the stable. "Weel," he added, "ye maunna gley asklent at the
mere whan she comes hame some saipy-like!"

When he returned on the mare's back, the farmer was waiting for him with
the whisky-bottle in his hand.

"Na, na!" he said, seeing the lad eye the bottle, "it's no for you! ye
want a' the sma' wit ye ever hed: it's no _you_ 'at has to gallop; ye
hae but to stick on!--Hae, Susy!"

He poured half a tumblerful into a soup-plate, and held it out to the
mare, who, never snuffing at it, licked it up greedily, and immediately
started of herself at a good pace.

Peter carried the bottle to the chamber, and got Isy to swallow a
little, after which she began to recover again. Nor did Marion forget to
administer a share to James, who was not a little in want of it.

When, within an hour, the doctor arrived full of amazed incredulity, he
found Isy in a troubled sleep, and James gone to bed.




CHAPTER XXIII


The next day, Isy, although very weak, was greatly better. She was,
however, too ill to get up; and Marion seemed now in her element, with
two invalids, both dear to her, to look after. She hardly knew for which
to be more grateful--her son, given helpless into her hands, unable to
repel the love she lavished upon him; or the girl whom God had taken
from the very throat of the swallowing grave. But her heart, at first
bubbling over with gladness, soon grew calmer, when she came to perceive
how very ill James was. And before long she began to fear she must
part with her child, whose lack of love hitherto made the threatened
separation the more frightful to her. She turned even from the thought
of Isy's restoration, as if that were itself an added wrong. From the
occasional involuntary association of the two in her thought, she would
turn away with a sort of meek loathing. To hold her James for one moment
in the same thought with any girl less spotless than he, was to disgrace
herself!

James was indeed not only very ill, but growing slowly worse; for he
lay struggling at last in the Backbite of Conscience, who had him in her
unrelaxing jaws, and was worrying him well. Whence the holy dog came
we know, but how he got a hold of him to begin his saving torment, who
shall understand but the maker of men and of their secret, inexorable
friend! Every beginning is infinitesimal, and wrapt in the mystery of
creation.

Its results only, not its modes of operation or their stages, I may
venture attempting to convey. It was the wind blowing where it listed,
doing everything and explaining nothing. That wind from the timeless and
spaceless and formless region of God's feeling and God's thought, blew
open the eyes of this man's mind so that he saw, and became aware that
he saw. It blew away the long-gathered vapours of his self-satisfaction
and conceit; it blew wide the windows of his soul, that the sweet odour
of his father's and mother's thoughts concerning him might enter; and
when it entered, he knew it for what it was; it blew back to him his own
judgments of them and their doings, and he saw those judgments side by
side with his new insights into their real thoughts and feelings; it
blew away the desert sands of his own moral dulness, indifference, and
selfishness, that had so long hidden beneath them the watersprings of
his own heart, existent by and for love and its gladness; it cleared
all his conscious being, made him understand that he had never hitherto
loved his mother or his father, or any neighbour; that he had never
loved God one genuine atom, never loved the Lord Christ, his Master,
or cared in the least that he had died for him; had never at any moment
loved Isy--least of all when to himself he pleaded in his own excuse
that he had loved her. That blowing wind, which he could not see,
neither knew whence it came, and yet less whither it was going, began to
blow together his soul and those of his parents; the love in his father
and in his mother drew him; the memories of his childhood drew him; for
the heart of God himself was drawing him, as it had been from the first,
only now first he began to feel its drawing; and as he yielded to that
drawing and went nearer, God drew ever more and more strongly; until at
last--I know not, I say, how God did it, or whereby he made the soul of
James Blatherwick different from what it had been--but at last it grew
capable of loving, and did love: first, he yielded to love because he
could not help it; then he willed to love because he could love; then,
become conscious of the power, he loved the more, and so went on to
love more and more. And thus did James become what he had to become--or
perish.

But for this liberty, he had to pass through wild regions of torment
and horror; he had to become all but mad, and know it; his body, and his
soul as well, had to be parched with fever, thirst, and fear; he had to
sleep and dream lovely dreams of coolness and peace and courage; then
wake and know that all his life he had been dead, and now first was
alive; that love, new-born, was driving out the gibbering phantoms; that
now indeed it was good to be, and know others alive about him; that now
life was possible, because life was to love, and love was to live. What
love was, or how it was, he could not tell; he knew only that it was the
will and the joy of the Father and the Son.

Long ere he arrived at this, however, the falsehood and utter meanness
of his behaviour to Isy had become plain to him, bringing with it such
an overpowering self-contempt and self-loathing, that he was tempted
even to self-destruction to escape the knowledge that he was himself the
very man who had been such, and had done such things. "To know my deed,
'twere best not know myself!" he might have said with Macbeth. But he
must live on, for how otherwise could he make any atonement? And with
the thought of reparation, and possible forgiveness and reconcilement,
his old love for Isy rushed in like a flood, grown infinitely nobler,
and was uplifted at last into a genuine self-abandoning devotion. But
until this final change arrived, his occasional paroxysms of remorse
touched almost on madness, and for some time it seemed doubtful whether
his mind must not retain a permanent tinge of insanity. He conceived
a huge disgust of his office and all its requirements; and sometimes
bitterly blamed his parents for not interfering with his choice of a
profession that was certain to be his ruin.

One day, having had no delirium for some hours, he suddenly called out
as they stood by his bed--

"Oh, mother! oh, father! _why_ did you tempt me to such hypocrisy? _Why_
did you not bring me up to walk at the plough-tail? _Then_ I should
never have had to encounter the damnable snares of the pulpit! It was
that which ruined me--the notion that I must take the minister for my
pattern, and live up to my idea of _him_, before even I had begun to
cherish anything real in me! It was the road royal to hypocrisy! Without
that rootless, worthless, devilish fancy, I might have been no worse
than other people! Now I am lost! Now I shall never get back to bare
honesty, not to say innocence! They are both gone for ever!"

The poor mother could only imagine it his humility that made him accuse
himself of hypocrisy, and that because he had not fulfilled to the
uttermost the smallest duty of his great office.

"Jamie, dear," she cried, laying her cheek to his, "ye maun cast yer
care upo' Him that careth for ye! He kens ye hae dene yer best--or if
no yer vera best--for wha daur say that?--ye hae at least dene what ye
could!"

"Na, na!" he answered, resuming the speech of his boyhood--a far better
sign of him than his mother understood, "I ken ower muckle, and that
muckle ower weel, to lay sic a flattering unction to my sowl! It's jist
as black as the fell mirk! 'Ah, limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
art more engaged!'"

"Hoots, ye're dreamin, laddie! Ye never was engaged to onybody--at least
that ever I h'ard tell o'! But, ony gait, fash na ye aboot that! Gien it
be onything o' sic a natur that's troublin ye, yer father and me we s'
get ye clear o' 't!"

"Ay, there ye're at it again! It was _you_ 'at laid the bird-lime! Ye
aye tuik pairt, mither, wi' the muckle deil that wad na rist till he had
my sowl in his deepest pit!"

"The Lord kens his ain: he'll see that they come throuw unscaumit!"

"The Lord disna mak ony hypocreet o' purpose doobtless; but gien a
man sin efter he has ance come to the knowledge o' the trowth, there
remaineth for him--ye ken the lave o' 't as weel as I dee mysel, mother!
My only houp lies in a doobt--a doobt, that is, whether I _had_ ever
come til a knowledge o' the trowth--or hae yet!--Maybe no!"

"Laddie, ye're no i' yer richt min'. It's fearsome to hearken til ye!"

"It'll be waur to hear me roarin wi' the rich man i' the lowes o' hell!"

"Peter! Peter!" cried Marion, driven almost to distraction, "here's yer
ain son, puir fallow, blasphemin like ane o' the condemned! He jist gars
me creep!"

Receiving no answer, for her husband was nowhere near at the moment, she
called aloud in her desperation--

"Isy! Isy! come and see gien ye can dee onything to quaiet this ill
bairn."

Isy heard, and sprang from her bed.

"Comin, mistress!" she answered; "comin this moment."

They had not met since her resurrection, as Peter always called it.

"Isy! Isy!" cried James, the moment he heard her approaching, "come and
hand the deil aff o' me!"

He had risen to his elbow, and was looking eagerly toward the door.

She entered. James threw wide his arms, and with glowing eyes clasped
her to his bosom. She made no resistance: his mother would lay it all to
the fever! He broke into wild words of love, repentance, and devotion.

"Never heed him a hair, mem; he's clean aff o' his heid!" she said in
a low voice, making no attempt to free herself from his embrace, but
treating him like a delirious child. "There maun be something aboot me,
mem, that quaiets him a bit! It's the brain, ye ken, mem! it's the het
brain! We maunna contre him! he maun hae his ain w'y for a wee!"

But such was James's behaviour to Isy that it was impossible for the
mother not to perceive that, incredible as it might seem, this must
be far from the first time they had met; and presently she fell to
examining her memory whether she herself might not have seen Isy
before ever she came to Stonecross; but she could find no answer to her
inquiry, press the question as she might. By and by, her husband came
in to have his dinner, and finding herself compelled, much against her
will, to leave the two together, she sent up Eppie to take Isy's place,
with the message that she was to go down at once. Isy obeyed, and went
to the kitchen; but, perturbed and trembling, dropped on the first chair
she came to. The farmer, already seated at the table, looked up, and
anxiously regarding her, said--

"Bairn, ye're no fit to be aboot! Ye maun caw canny, or ye'll be ower
the burn yet or ever ye're safe upo' this side o' 't! Preserve's a'! ir
we to lowse ye twise in ae month?"

"Jist answer me ae queston, Isy, and I'll speir nae mair," said Marion.

"Na, na, never a queston!" interposed Peter;--"no ane afore even the
shaidow o' deith has left the hoose!--Draw ye up to the table, my bonny
bairn: this isna a time for ceremony, and there's sma' room for that ony
day!"

Finding, however, that she sat motionless, and looked far more
death-like than while in her trance, he got up, and insisted on her
swallowing a little whisky; when she revived, and glad to put herself
under his nearer protection, took the chair he had placed for her beside
him, and made a futile attempt at eating. "It's sma' won'er the puir
thing hasna muckle eppiteet," remarked Mrs. Blatherwick, "considerin the
w'y yon ravin laddie up the stair has been cairryin on til her!"

"What! Hoo's that?" questioned her husband with a start.

"But ye're no to mak onything o' that, Isy!" added her mistress.

"Never a particle, mem!" returned Isy. "I ken weel it stan's for
naething but the heat o' the burnin brain! I'm richt glaid though, that
the sicht o' me did seem to comfort him a wee!"

"Weel, I'm no sae sure!" answered Marion. "But we'll say nae mair anent
that the noo! The guidman says no; and his word's law i' this hoose."

Isy resumed her pretence of breakfast. Presently Eppie came down, and
going to her master, said--

"Here's An'ra, sir, come to speir efter the yoong minister and Isy: am I
to gar him come in?"

"Ay, and gie him his brakfast," shouted the farmer.

The old woman set a chair for her son by the door, and proceeded to
attend to him. James was left alone.

Silence again fell, and the appearance of eating was resumed, Peter
being the only one that made a reality of it. Marion was occupied with
many thinkings, specially a growing doubt and soreness about Isy. The
hussy had a secret! She had known something all the time, and had been
taking advantage of her unsuspiciousness! It would be a fine thing for
her, indeed, to get hold of the minister! but she would see him dead
first! It was too bad of the Robertsons, whom she had known so long and
trusted so much! They knew what they were doing when they passed their
trash upon her! She began to distrust ministers! What right had they to
pluck brands from the burning at the expense o' dacent fowk! It was to
do evil that good might come! She would say that to their faces! Thus
she sat thinking and glooming.

A cry of misery came from the room above. Isy started to her feet. But
Marion was up before her.

"Sit doon this minute," she commanded.

Isy hesitated.

"Sit doon this moment, I tell ye!" repeated Marion imperiously. "Ye hae
no business there! I'm gaein til 'im mysel!" And with the word she left
the room.

Peter laid down his spoon, then half rose, staring bewildered, and
followed his wife from the room.

"Oh my baby! my baby!" cried Isy, finding herself alone. "If only I had
you to take my part! It was God gave you to me, or how could I love you
so? And the mistress winna believe that even I had a bairnie! Noo she'll
be sayin I killt my bonny wee man! And yet, even for _his_ sake, I never
ance wisht ye hadna been born! And noo, whan the father o' 'im's ill,
and cryin oot for me, they winna lat me near 'im!"

The last words left her lips in a wailing shriek.

Then first she saw that her master had reentered. Wiping her eyes
hurriedly, she turned to him with a pitiful, apologetic smile.

"Dinna be sair vext wi' me, sir: I canna help bein glaid that I had him,
and to tyne him has gien me an unco sair hert!"

She stopped, terrified: how much had he heard? she could not tell what
she might not have said! But the farmer had resumed his breakfast, and
went on eating as if she had not spoken. He had heard nearly all she
said, and now sat brooding on her words.

Isy was silent, saying in her heart--"If only he loved me, I should be
content, and desire no more! I would never even want him to say it! I
would be so good to him, and so silent, that he could not help loving me
a little!"

I wonder whether she would have been as hopeful had she known how his
mother had loved him, and how vainly she had looked for any love in
return! And when Isy vowed in her heart never to let James know that she
had borne him a son, she did not perceive that thus she would withhold
the most potent of influences for his repentance and restoration to God
and his parents. She did not see James again that night; and before she
fell asleep at last in the small hours of the morning, she had made up
her mind that, ere the same morning grew clear upon the moor, she would,
as the only thing left her to do for him, be far away from Stonecross.
She would go back to Deemouth, and again seek work at the paper-mills!




CHAPTER XXIV


She woke in the first of the gray dawn, while the house was in utter
stillness, and rising at once, rose and dressed herself with soundless
haste. It was hard indeed to go and leave James thus in danger, but she
had no choice! She held her breath and listened, but all was still. She
opened her door softly; not a sound reached her ear as she crept down
the stair. She had neither to unlock nor unbolt the door to leave the
house, for it was never made fast. A dread sense of the old wandering
desolation came back upon her as she stepped across the threshold, and
now she had no baby to comfort her! She was leaving a mouldy peace and
a withered love behind her, and had once more to encounter the rough
coarse world! She feared the moor she had to cross, and the old dreams
she must there encounter; and as she held on her way through them, she
felt, in her new loneliness, and the slow-breaking dawn, as if she were
lying again in her trance, partly conscious, but quite unable to move,
thinking she was dead, and waiting to be buried. Then suddenly she knew
where she was, and that God was not gone, but her own Maker was with
her, and would not forsake her.

Of the roads that led from the farm she knew only that by which Mr.
Robertson had brought her, and that would guide her to the village
where they had left the coach: there she was sure to find some way of
returning to Deemouth! Feeble after her prolonged inaction, and the
crowd of emotions succeeding her recovery, she found the road very
weary, and long ere she reached Tiltowie, she felt all but worn out.
At the only house she had come to on the way, she stopped and asked for
some water. The woman, the only person she had seen, for it was still
early morning, and the road was a lonely one, perceived that she looked
ill, and gave her milk instead. In the strength of that milk she reached
the end of her first day's journey; and for many days she had not to
take a second.

Now Isy had once seen the soutar at the farm, and going about her work
had heard scraps of his conversation with the mistress, when she had
been greatly struck by certain things he said, and had often since
wished for the opportunity of a talk with him. That same morning then,
going along a narrow lane, and hearing a cobbler's hammer, she glanced
through a window close to the path, and at once recognized the soutar.
He looked up as she obscured his light, and could scarce believe his
eyes when, so early in the day, he saw before him Mistress Blatherwick's
maid, concerning whom there had been such a talk and such a marvelling
for weeks. She looked ill, and he was amazed to see her about so soon,
and so far from home. She smiled to him feebly, and passed from his
range with a respectful nod. He sprang to his feet, bolted out, and
overtook her at once.

"I'm jist gaein to drop my wark, mem, and hae my brakfast: wull ye no
come in and share wi' an auld man and a yoong lass? Ye hae come a gey
bit, and luik some fatiguit!"

"Thank ye kindly, sir," returned Isy. "I _am_ a bit tired!--But I won'er
ye kenned me!"

"Weel, I canna jist say I ken ye by the name fowk ca' ye; and still less
div I ken ye by the name the Lord ca's ye; but nowther maitters muckle
to her that kens He has a name growin for her--or raither, a name she's
growin til! Eh, what a day will that be whan ilk habitant o' the holy
city 'ill tramp the streets o' 't weel kenned and weel kennin!"

"Ay, sir! I 'maist un'erstan' ye ootricht, for I h'ard ye ance sayin
something like that to the mistress, the nicht ye broucht hame the
maister's shune to Stanecross. And, eh, I'm richt glaid to see ye
again!"

They were already in the house, for she had followed him in almost
mechanically; and the soutar was setting for her the only chair there
was, when the cry of a child reached their ears. The girl started to
her feet. A rosy flush of delight overspread her countenance; she fell
a-trembling from head to foot, and it seemed uncertain whether she would
succeed in running to the cry, or must fall to the floor.

"Ay," exclaimed the soutar, with one of his sudden flashes of
unquestioning insight, "by the luik o' ye, ye ken that for the cry
o' yer ain bairn, my bonny lass! Ye'll hae been missin him, sair, I
doobt!--There! sit ye doon, and I'll hae him i' yer airms afore ae
meenut!"

She obeyed him and sat down, but kept her eyes fixed on the door, wildly
expectant. The soutar made haste, and ran to fetch the child. When he
returned with him in his arms, he found her sitting bolt upright, with
her hands already apart, held out to receive him, and her eyes alive as
he had never seen eyes before.

"My Jamie! my ain bairn!" she cried, seizing him to her bosom with a
grasp that, trembling, yet seemed to cling to him desperately, and a
look almost of defiance, as if she dared the world to take him from her
again. "O my God!" she cried, in an agony of thankfulness, "I ken
ye noo! I ken ye noo! Never mair wull I doobt ye, my God!--Lost and
found!--Lost for a wee, and found again for ever!"

Then she caught sight of Maggie, who had entered behind her father, and
stood staring at her motionless,--with a look of gladness indeed, but
not all of gladness.

"I ken fine," Isy broke out, with a trembling, yet eager, apologetic
voice, "ye're grudgin me ilka luik at him! I ken't by mysel! Ye're
thinkin him mair yours nor mine! And weel ye may, for it's you that's
been motherin him ever since I lost my wits! It's true I ran awa' and
left him; but ever sin' syne, I hae soucht him carefully wi' tears! And
ye maunna beir me ony ill will--for there!" she added, holding him out
to Maggie! "I haena kissed him yet!--no ance!--But ye wull lat me kiss
him afore ye tak him awa'?--my ain bairnie, whause vera comin I had
prepared shame for!--Oh my God!--But he kens naething aboot it, and
winna ken for years to come! And nane but his ain mammie maun brak the
dreid trowth til him!--and by that time he'll lo'e her weel eneuch to be
able to bide it! I thank God that I haena had to shue the birds and the
beasts aff o' his bonny wee body! It micht hae been, but for you, my
bonnie lass!--and for you, sir!" she went on, turning to the soutar.

Maggie caught the child from her offering arms, and held up his little
face for his mother to kiss; and so held him until, for the moment,
Isy's mother-greed was satisfied. Then she sat down with him in her lap,
and Isy stood absorbed in regarding him. At last she said, with a deep
sigh--

"Noo I maun awa', and I dinna ken hoo I'm to gang! I hae found him and
maun leave him!--but I houp no for vera lang!--Maybe ye'll keep him yet
a whilie--say for a week mair? He's been sae lang disused til a wan'erin
life, that I doobt it mayna weel agree wi' him; and I maun awa' back to
Deemooth, gien I can get onybody to gie me a lift."

"Na, na; that'll never dee," returned Maggie, with a sob. "My father'll
be glaid eneuch to keep him; only we hae nae richt ower him, and ye maun
hae him again whan ye wull."

"Ye see I hae nae place to tak him til!" pleaded Isy.

"Gien ye dinna want him, gie him to me: I want him!" said Maggie
eagerly.

"Want him!" returned Isy, bursting into tears; "I hae lived but upo the
bare houp o' gettin him again! I hae grutten my een sair for the sicht
o' 'im! Aften hae I waukent greetin ohn kenned for what!--and noo ye
tell me I dinna want him, 'cause I hae nae spot but my breist to lay his
heid upo! Eh, guid fowk, keep him till I get a place to tak him til, and
syne haudna him a meenute frae me!"

All this time the soutar had been watching the two girls with a divine
look in his black eyes and rugged face; now at last he opened his mouth
and said:

"Them 'at haps the bairn, are aye sib _(related)_ to the mither!--Gang
ben the hoose wi' Maggie, my dear; and lay ye doon on her bed, and
she'll lay the bairnie aside ye, and fess yer brakfast there til ye. Ye
winna be easy to sair _(satisfy)_, haein had sae little o' 'im for
sae lang!--Lea' them there thegither, Maggie, my doo," he went on with
infinite tenderness, "and come and gie me a han' as sune as ye hae
maskit the tay, and gotten a lof o' white breid. I s' hae my parritch a
bit later."

Maggie obeyed at once, and took Isy to the other end of the house, where
the soutar had long ago given up his bed to her and the baby.

When they had all breakfasted, the soutar and Maggie in the kitchen, and
Isy and the bairnie in the ben en', Maggie took her old place beside her
father, and for a long time they worked without word spoken.

"I doobt, father," said Maggie at length, "I haena been atten'in til ye
properly! I fear the bairnie 's been garrin me forget ye!"

"No a hair, dautie!" returned the soutar. "The needs o' the little are
stude aye far afore mine, and _had_ to be seen til first! And noo that
we hae the mither o' 'im, we'll get on faumous!--Isna she a fine cratur,
and richt mitherlike wi' the bairn? That was a' I was concernt aboot!
We'll get her story frae her or lang, and syne we'll ken a hantle better
hoo to help her on! And there can be nae fear but, atween you and
me, and the Michty at the back o' 's, we s' get breid eneuch for the
quaternion o' 's!"

He laughed at the odd word as it fell from his mouth and the Acts of
Apostles. Maggie laughed too, and wiped her eyes.

Before long, Maggie recognized that she had never been so happy in her
life. Isy told them as much as she could without breaking her resolve
to keep secret a certain name; and wrote to Mr. Robertson, telling him
where she was, and that she had found her baby. He came with his wife to
see her, and so a friendship began between the soutar and him, which Mr.
Robertson always declared one of the most fortunate things that had ever
befallen him.

"That soutar-body," he would say, "kens mair aboot God and his kingdom,
the hert o' 't and the w'ys o' 't, than ony man I ever h'ard tell
o'--and _that_ heumble!--jist like the son o' God himsel!"

Before many days passed, however, a great anxiety laid hold of the
little household: wee Jamie was taken so ill that the doctor had to be
summoned. For eight days he had much fever, and his appealing looks
were pitiful to see. When first he ceased to run about, and wanted to be
nursed, no one could please him but the soutar himself, and he, at once
discarding his work, gave himself up to the child's service. Before
long, however, he required defter handling, and then no one would do but
Maggie, to whom he had been more accustomed; nor could Isy get any share
in the labour of love except when he was asleep: as soon as he woke, she
had to encounter the pain of hearing him cry out for Maggie, and seeing
him stretch forth his hands, even from his mother's lap, to one whom he
knew better than her. But Maggie was very careful over the poor mother,
and would always, the minute he was securely asleep, lay him softly upon
her lap. And Maggie soon got so high above her jealousy, that one of the
happiest moments in her life was when first the child consented to leave
her arms for those of his mother. And when he was once more able to run
about, Isy took her part with Maggie in putting hand and needle to the
lining of the more delicate of the soutar's shoes.




CHAPTER XXV


There was great concern, and not a little alarm at Stonecross because of
the disappearance of Isy. But James continued so ill, that his parents
were unable to take much thought about anybody else. At last, however,
the fever left him, and he began to recover, but lay still and silent,
seeming to take no interest in anything, and remembered nothing he
had said, or even that he had seen Isy. At the same time his wakened
conscience was still at work in him, and had more to do with his
enfeebled condition than the prolonged fever. At length his parents were
convinced that he had something on his mind that interfered with his
recovery, and his mother was confident that it had to do with "that
deceitful creature, Isy." To learn that she was safe, might have given
Marion some satisfaction, had she not known her refuge so near the
manse; and having once heard where she was, she had never asked another
question about her. Her husband, however, having overheard certain
of the words that fell from Isy when she thought herself alone, was
intently though quietly waiting for what must follow.

"I'm misdoobtin sair, Peter," began Marion one morning, after a long
talk with the cottar's wife, who had been telling her of Isy's having
taken up her abode with the soutar, "I'm sair misdoobtin whether that
hizzie hadna mair to dee nor we hae been jaloosin, wi Jamie's attack,
than the mere scare he got. It seems to me he's lang been broodin ower
something we ken noucht aboot."

"That would be nae ferlie, woman! Whan was it ever we kent onything
gaein on i' that mysterious laddie! Na, but his had need be a guid
conscience, for did ever onybody ken eneuch aboot it or him to say
richt or wrang til 'im! But gien ye hae a thoucht he's ever wranged that
lassie, I s' hae the trowth o' 't, gien it cost him a greitin! He'll
never come to health o' body or min' till he's confest, and God has
forgien him. He maun confess! He maun confess!"

"Hoot, Peter, dinna be sae suspicious o' yer ain. It's no like ye to
be sae maisterfu' and owerbeirin. I wad na lat ae ill thoucht o' puir
Jeemie inside this auld heid o' mine! It's the lassie, I'll tak my aith,
it's that Isy's at the bothom o' 't!"

"Ye're some ready wi' yer aith, Mirran, to what ye ken naething aboot! I
say again, gien he's dene ony wrang to that bonnie cratur--and it wudna
tak ower muckle proof to convince me o' the same, he s' tak his stan',
minister or no minister, upo the stele o' repentance!"

"Daur ye to speyk that gait aboot yer ain son--ay, and mine the mair
gien _ye_ disown him, Peter Bletherwick!--and the Lord's ain ordeent
minister forbye!" cried Marion, driven almost to her wits' end, but more
by the persistent haunting of her own suspicion, which she could not
repress, than the terror of her husband's threat. "Besides, dinna ye
see," she added cunningly, "that that would be to affront the lass as
weel?--_He_ wadna be the first to fa' intil the snare o' a designin
wuman, and wad it be for his ain father to expose him to public contemp?
_Your_ pairt sud be to cover up his sin--gien it were a multitude, and
no ae solitary bit faut!"

"Daur _ye_ speyk o' a thing like that as a bit faut?--Ca' ye leein and
hypocrisy a bit faut? I alloo the sin itsel mayna be jist damnable,
but to what bouk mayna it come wi ither and waur sins upo the back o'
't?--Wi leein, and haudin aff o' himsel, a man may grow a cratur no fit
to be taen up wi the taings! Eh me, but my pride i' the laddie! It 'ill
be sma' pride for me gien this fearsome thing turn oot to be true!"

"And wha daur say it's true?" rejoined Marion almost fiercely.

"Nane but himsel; and gien it be sae, and he disna confess, the rod
laid upon him 'ill be the rod o' iron, 'at smashes a man like a muckle
crock.--I maun tak Jamie throuw han' _(to task)_!"

"Noo jist tak ye care, Peter, 'at ye dinna quench the smokin flax."

"I'm mair likly to get the bruised reed intil my nakit loof _(palm)_!"
returned Peter. "But I s' say naething till he's a wee better, for we
maunna drive him to despair!--Eh gien he would only repent! What is
there I wadna dee to clear him--that is, to ken him innocent o' ony
wrang til her! I wad dee wi thanksgivin!"

"Weel, I kenna that we're jist called upon sae far as that!" said
Marion. "A lass is aye able to tak care o' hersel!"

"I wud! I wud!--God hae mercy upo' the twa o' them!"

In the afternoon James was a good deal better. When his father went in
to see him, his first words were--

"I doobt, father, I'm no likly to preach ony mair: I've come to see 'at
I never was fit for the wark, neither had I ever ony ca' til't."

"It may be sae, Jeemie," answered his father; "but we'll haud awa frae
conclusions till ye're better, and able to jeedge wi'oot the bias o' ony
thrawin distemper."

"Oh father," James went on, and to his delight Peter saw, for the first
time since he was the merest child, tears running down his cheeks, now
thin and wan; "Oh father, I hae been a terrible hypocreet! But my een's
come open at last! I see mysel as I am!"

"Weel, there's God hard by, to tak ye by the han' like Enoch! Tell me,"
Peter went on, "hae ye onything upo yer min', laddie, 'at ye wud like
to confess and be eased o'? There's nae papistry in confessin to yer ain
auld father!"

James lay still for a few moments; then he said, almost inaudibly--

"I think I could tell my mother better nor you, father."

"It'll be a' ane whilk o' 's ye tell. The forgiein and the forgettin
'ill be ae deed--by the twa o' 's at ance! I s' gang and cry doon
the stair til yer mother to come up and hear ye." For Peter knew by
experience that good motions must be taken advantage of in their first
ripeness. "We maunna try the speerit wi ony delays!" he added, as he
went to the head of the stair, where he called aloud to his wife. Then
returning to the bedside, he resumed his seat, saying, "I'll jist bide a
minute till she comes."

He was loath to let in any risk between his going and her coming, for he
knew how quickly minds may change; but the moment she appeared, he left
the room, gently closing the door behind him.

Then the trembling, convicted soul plucked up what courage his so long
stubborn and yet cringing heart was capable of, and began.

"Mother, there was a lass I cam to ken in Edinburgh, whan I was a
divinity student there, and--"

"Ay, ay, I ken a' aboot it!" interrupted his mother, eager to spare him;
"--an ill-faured, designin limmer, 'at micht ha kent better nor come
ower the son o' a respectable wuman that gait!--Sic like, I doobtna, wad
deceive the vera elec'!"

"Na, na, mother, she was nane o' that sort! She was baith bonny and
guid, and pleasant to the hert as to the sicht: she wad hae saved me
gien I had been true til her! She was ane o' the Lord's makin, as he has
made but feow!"

"Whatfor didna she haud frae ye till ye had merried her than? Dinna tell
me she didna lay hersel oot to mak a prey o' ye!"

"Mother, i' that sayin ye hae sclandert yersel!--I'll no say a word
mair!"

"I'm sure neither yer father nor mysel wud hae stede i' yer gait!" said
Marion, retreating from the false position she had taken.

She did not know herself, or how bitter would have been her opposition;
for she had set her mind on a distinguished match for her Jamie!

"God knows how I wish I had keepit a haud o' mysel! Syne I micht hae
steppit oot o' the dirt o' my hypocrisy, i'stead o' gaein ower the heid
intil't! I was aye a hypocrite, but she would maybe hae fun' me oot, and
garred me luik at mysel!"

He did not know the probability that, if he had not fallen, he would
have but sunk the deeper in the worst bog of all, self-satisfaction, and
none the less have played her false, and left her to break her heart.

If any reader of this tale should argue it better then to do wrong and
repent, than to resist the devil, I warn him, that in such case he will
not repent until the sorrows of death and the pains of hell itself lay
hold upon him. An overtaking fault may be beaten with few stripes, but
a wilful wrong shall be beaten with many stripes. The door of the latter
must share, not with Judas, for he did repent, although too late, but
with such as have taken from themselves the power of repentance.

"Was there no mark left o' her disgrace?" asked his mother. "Wasna there
a bairn to mak it manifest?"

"Nane I ever heard tell o'."

"In that case she's no muckle the waur, and ye needna gang lamentin:
_she_ 'll no be the ane to tell! and _ye_ maunna, for her sake! Sae
tak ye comfort ower what's gane and dune wi', and canna come back, and
maunna happen again.--Eh, but it's a' God's-mercy there was nae bairn!"

Thus had the mother herself become an evil councillor, crying Peace!
peace! when there was no peace, and tempting her son to go on and
become a devil! But one thing yet rose up for the truth in his miserable
heart--his reviving and growing love for Isy. It had seemed smothered in
selfishness, but was alive and operative: God knows how--perhaps through
feverish, incoherent, forgotten dreams.

He had expected his mother to aid his repentance, and uphold his walk
in the way of righteousness, even should the way be that of social
disgrace. He knew well that reparation must go hand in hand with
repentance where the All-wise was judge, and selfish Society dared not
urge one despicable pretence for painting hidden shame in the hues of
honour. James had been the cowering slave of a false reputation; but
his illness and the assaults of his conscience had roused him, set
repentance before him, brought confession within sight, and purity
within reach of prayer.

"I maun gang til her," he cried, "the meenute I'm able to be up!--Whaur
is she, mother?"

"Upo nae accoont see her, Jamie! It wad be but to fa' again intil her
snare!" answered his mother, with decision in her look and tone. "We're
to abstain frae a' appearance o' evil--as ye ken better nor I can tell
ye."

"But Isy's no an appearance o' evil, mother!"

"Ye say weel there, I confess! Na, she's no an appearance; she's the
vera thing! Haud frae her, as ye wad frae the ill ane himsel."

"Did she never lat on what there had been atween 's?"

"Na, never. She kenned weel what would come o' that!"

"What, mother?"

"The ootside o' the door."

"Think ye she ever tauld onybody?"

"Mony ane, I doobtna."

"Weel, I dinna believe 't, I hae nae fear but she's been dumb as deith!"

"Hoo ken ye that?--What for said she never ae word aboot ye til yer ain
mither?"

"'Cause she was set on haudin her tongue. Was she to bring an owre true
tale o' me to the vera hoose I was born in? As lang as I haud til my
tongue, she'll never wag hers!--Eh, but she's a true ane! _She's_ ane to
lippen til!"

"Weel, I alloo, she's deen as a wuman sud--the faut bein a' her ain!"

"The faut bein' a' mine, mother, she wouldna tell what would disgrace
me!"

"She micht hae kenned her secret would be safe wi' me!"

"_I_ micht hae said the same, but for the w'y ye spak o' her this vera
meenut!--Whaur is she, mother? Whaur's Isy?"

"'Deed, she's made a munelicht flittin o' 't!"

"I telled ye she would never tell upo me!--Hed she ony siller?"

"Hoo can _I_ tell?"

"Did ye pey her ony wages?"

"She gae me no time!--But she's no likly to tell noo; for, hearin her
tale, wha wad tak her in?"

"Eh, mother, but ye _are_ hard-hertit!"

"I ken a harder, Jamie!"

"That's me!--and ye're richt, mother! But, eh, gien ye wad hae me loe
ye frae this meenut to the end o' my days, be but a wee fair to Isy: _I_
hae been a damnt scoon'rel til her!"

"Jamie; Jamie! ye're provokin the Lord to anger--sweirin like that in
his vera face--and you a minister!"

"I provokit him a heap waur whan I left Isy to dree her shame! Divna ye
min' hoo the apostle Peter cursed, whan he said to Simon, 'Gang to hell
wi' yer siller!'"

"She's telt the soutar, onygait!"

"What! has _he_ gotten a hand o' her?"

"Ay, has he!--And dinna ye think it'll be a' ower the toon lang or
this!"

"And hoo will ye meet it, mother?"

"We maun tell yer father, and get him to quaiet the soutar!--For _her_,
we maun jist stap her mou wi' a bunch o' bank-notts!"

"That wad jist mak it 'maist impossible for even her to forgie you or me
aither ony langer!"

"And wha's she to speyk o' forgivin!"

The door opened, and Peter entered. He strode up to his wife, and stood
over her like an angel of vengeance. His very lips were white with
wrath.

"Efter thirty years o' merried life, noo first to ken the wife o' my
boasom for a messenger o' Sawtan!" he panted. "Gang oot o' my sicht,
wuman!"

She fell on her knees, and held up her two hands to him.

"Think o' Jamie, Peter!" she pleaded. "I wad tyne my sowl for Jamie!"

"Ay, and tyne his as weel!" he returned. "Tyne what's yer ain to tyne,
wuman--and that's no your sowl, nor yet Jamie's! He's no yours to save,
but ye're deein a' ye can to destroy him--and aiblins ye'll succeed! for
ye wad sen' him straucht awa to hell for the sake o' a guid name--a lee!
a hypocrisy!--Oot upo ye for a Christian mither, Mirran!--Jamie, I'm awa
to the toon, upo my twa feet, for the mere's cripple: the vera deil's
i' the hoose and the stable and a', it would seem!--I'm awa to fess Isy
hame! And, Jamie, ye'll jist tell her afore me and yer mother, that as
sene 's ye're able to crawl to the kirk wi' her, ye'll merry her afore
the warl', and tak her hame to the manse wi' ye!"

"Hoot, Peter! Wad ye disgrace him afore a' the beggars o' Tiltowie?"

"Ay, and afore God, that kens a'thing ohn onybody tellt him! Han's and
hert I s' be clear o' this abomination!"

"Merry a wuman 'at was ta'en wi' a wat finger!--a maiden that never said
_na_!--Merry a lass that's nae maiden, nor ever will be!--Hoots!"

"And wha's to blame for that?"

"Hersel."

"Jeemie! Jist Jeemie!--I'm fair scunnert at ye, Mirran!--Oot o' my
sicht, I tell ye!--Lord, I kenna hoo I'm to win ower 't!--No to a'
eternity, I doobt!"

He turned from her with a tearing groan, and went feeling for the open
door, like one struck blind.

"Oh, father, father!" cried James, "forgie my mither afore ye gang,
or my hert 'ill brak. It's the awfu'est thing o' ony to see you twa
striven!"

"She's no sorry, no ae bit sorry!" said Peter.

"I am, I am, Peter!" cried Marion, breaking down at once, and utterly.
"Dee what ye wull, and I'll dee the same--only lat it be dene quaietly,
'ithoot din or proclamation! What for sud a'body ken a'thing! Wha has
the richt to see intil ither fowk's herts and lives? The wail' could ill
gang on gien that war the gait o' 't!"

"Father," said James, "I thank God that noo ye ken a'! Eh, sic a weicht
as it taks aff o' me! I'll be hale and weel noo in ae day!--I think I'll
gang wi' ye to Isy, mysel!--But I'm a wee bit sorry ye cam in jist that
minute! I wuss ye had harkit a wee langer! For I wasna giein-in to my
mother; I was but thinkin hoo to say oot what was in me, ohn vext her
waur nor couldna be helpit. Believe me, father, gien ye can; though I
doobt sair ye winna be able!"

"I believe ye, my bairn; and I thank God I hae that muckle pooer o'
belief left in me! I confess I was in ower great a hurry, and I'm sure
ye war takin the richt gait wi' yer puir mither.--Ye see she loed ye sae
weel that she could think o' nae thing or body but yersel! That's the
w'y o' mithers, Jamie, gien ye only kenned it! She was nigh sinnin an
awfu sin for your sake, man!"

Here he turned again to his wife. "That's what comes o' lovin the praise
o' men, Mirran! Easy it passes intil the fear o' men, and disregaird o'
the Holy!--I s' awa doon to the soutar, and tell him the cheenge that's
come ower us a': he'll no be a hair surprised!"

"I'm ready, father--or will be in ae minute!" said James, making as if
to spring out of bed.

"Na, na; ye're no fit!" interposed his father. "I would hae to be takin
ye upo my back afore we wis at the fut o' the brae!--Bide ye at hame,
and keep yer mither company."

"Ay, bide, Jamie; and I winna come near ye," sobbed his mother.

"Onything to please ye, mother!--but I'm fitter nor my father thinks,"
said James as he settled down again in bed.

So Peter went, leaving mother and son silent together.

At last the mother spoke.

"It's the shame o' 't, Jamie!" she said.

"The shame was i' the thing itsel, mother, and in hidin frae that
shame!" he answered. "Noo, I hae but the dregs to drink, and them I maun
glog ower wi' patience, for I hae weel deserved to drink them!--But, eh,
my bonnie Isy, she maun hae suffert sair!--I daur hardly think what she
maun hae come throuw!"

"Her mither couldna hae broucht her up richt! The first o' the faut lay
i' the upbringin!"

"There's anither whause upbringin wasna to blame: _my_ upbringin was a'
it oucht to hae been--and see hoo ill _I_ turnt oot!"

"It wasna what it oucht! I see 't a' plain the noo! I was aye ower feart
o' garrin ye hate me!--Oh, Isy, Isy, I hae dene ye wrang! I ken ye cud
never hae laid yersel oot to snare him--it wasna in ye to dee 't!"

"Thank ye, mother! It was, railly and truly, a' my wyte! And noo my life
sail gang to mak up til her!"

"And I maun see to the manse!" rejoined his mother. "--And first in
order o' a', that Jinse o' yours 'ill hae to gang!"

"As ye like, mother. But for the manse, I maun clear oot o' that! I'll
speak nae mair frae that poopit! I hae hypocreesit in 't ower lang! The
vera thoucht o' 't scunners me!"

"Speyk na like that o' the poopit, Jamie, whaur sae mony holy men hae
stede up and spoken the word o' God! It frichts me to hear ye! Ye'll
be a burnin and a shinin licht i' that poopit for mony a lang day efter
we're deid and hame!"

"The mair holy men that hae there witnessed, the less daur ony livin lee
stan' there braggin and blazin i' the face o' God and man! It's shame o'
mysel that gars me hate the place, mother! Ance and no more wull I stan'
there, making o' 't my stele o' repentance; and syne doon the steps and
awa, like Adam frae the gairden!"

"And what's to come o' Eve? Are ye gaein, like him, to say, 'The wuman
thoo giedest til me--it was a' her wyte'?"

"Ye ken weel I'm takin a' the wyte upo mysel!"

"But hoo can ye tak it a', or even ony fair share o' 't, gien up there
ye stan' and confess? Ye maun hae some care o' the lass--that is, gien
efter and a' ye're gaein to mak o' her yer wife, as ye profess.--And
what are ye gaein to turn yer han' til neist, seem ye hae a'ready laid
it til the pleuch and turnt back?"

"To the pleuch again, mother--the rael pleuch this time! Frae the kirk
door I'll come hame like the prodigal to my father's hoose, and say til
him, 'Set me to the pleuch, father. See gien I canna be something _like_
a son to ye, efter a''!"

So wrought in him that mighty power, mysterious in its origin as
marvellous in its result, which had been at work in him all the time he
lay whelmed under feverish phantasms.

His repentance was true; he had been dead, and was alive again! God and
the man had met at last! As to _how_ God turned the man's heart, Thou
God, knowest. To understand that, we should have to go down below the
foundations themselves, underneath creation, and there see God send out
from himself man, the spirit, distinguished yet never divided from God,
the spirit, for ever dependent upon and growing in Him, never completed
and never ended, his origin, his very life being infinite; never outside
of God, because _in_ him only he lives and moves and grows, and _has_
his being. Brothers, let us not linger to ask! let us obey, and,
obeying, ask what we will! thus only shall we become all we are capable
of being; thus only shall we learn all we are capable of knowing! The
pure in heart shall see God; and to see him is to know all things.

Something like this was the meditation of the soutar, as he saw the
farmer stride away into the dusk of the gathering twilight, going home
with glad heart to his wife and son.

Peter had told the soutar that his son was sorely troubled because of
a sin of his youth and its long concealment: now he was bent on all the
reparation he could make. "Mr. Robertson," said Peter, "broucht the lass
to oor hoose, never mentionin Jamie, for he didna ken they war onything
til ane anither; and for her, she never said ae word aboot him to Mirran
or me."

The soutar went to the door, and called Isy. She came, and stood humbly
before her old master.

"Weel, Isy," said the farmer kindly, "ye gied 's a clever slip yon
morning and a gey fricht forbye! What possessed ye, lass, to dee sic a
thing?"

She stood distressed, and made no answer.

"Hoot, lassie, tell me!" insisted Peter; "I haena been an ill maister
til ye, have I?"

"Sir, ye hae been like the maister o' a' til me! But I canna--that is, I
maunna--or raither, I'm determined no to explain the thing til onybody."

"Thoucht ye my wife was feart the minister micht fa' in love wi ye?"

"Weel, sir, there micht hae been something like that intil 't! But I
wantit sair to win at my bairn again; for i' that trance I lay in sae
lang, I saw or h'ard something I took for an intimation that he was
alive, and no that far awa.--And--wad ye believe't, sir?--i' this vera
hoose I fand him, and here I hae him, and I'm jist as happy the noo as I
was meeserable afore! Is 't ill o' me at I _canna_ be sorry ony mair?"

"Na, na," interposed the soutar: "whan the Lord wad lift the burden, it
wad be baith senseless and thankless to grup at it! In His name lat it
gang, lass!"

"And noo," said Mr. Blatherwick, again taking up his probe, "ye hae but
ae thing left to confess--and that's wha's the father o' 'im!"

"Na, I canna dee that, sir; it's enough that I have disgracet _myself_!
You wouldn't have me disgrace another as well! What good would that be?"

"It wad help ye beir the disgrace."

"Na, no a hair, sir; _he_ cudna stan' the disgrace half sae weel 's me!
I reckon the man the waiker vessel, sir; the woman has her bairn to fend
for, and that taks her aff o' the shame!"

"Ye dinna tell me he gies ye noucht to mainteen the cratur upo?"

"I tell ye naething, sir. He never even kenned there _was_ a bairn!"

"Hoot, toot! ye canna be sae semple! It's no poassible ye never loot him
ken!"

"'Deed no; I was ower sair ashamit! Ye see it was a' my wyte!--and it
was naebody's business! My auntie said gien I wouldna tell, I micht put
the door atween 's; and I took her at her word; for I kenned weel _she_
couldna keep a secret, and I wasna gaein to hae _his_ name mixed up wi'
a lass like mysel! And, sir, ye maunna try to gar me tell, for I hae no
richt, and surely ye canna hae the hert to gar me!--But that ye _sanna_,
ony gait!"

"I dinna blame ye, Isy! but there's jist ae thing I'm determined
upo--and that is that the rascal sail merry ye!"

Isy's face flushed; she was taken too much at unawares to hide her
pleasure at such a word from _his_ mouth. But the flush faded, and
presently Mr. Blatherwick saw that she was fighting with herself, and
getting the better of that self. The shadow of a pawky smile flitted
across her face as she answered--

"Surely ye wouldna merry me upon a rascal, sir! Ill as I hae behaved til
ye, I can hardly hae deservit that at yer han'!"

"That's what he'll hae to dee though--jist merry ye aff han'! I s' _gar_
him."

"I winna hae him garred! It's me that has the richt ower him, and
no anither, man nor wuman! He sanna be garred! What wad ye hae o'
me--thinkin I would tak a man 'at was garred! Na, na; there s' be nae
garrin!--And ye canna gar _him_ merry me gien _I_ winna hae him! The
day's by for that!--A garred man! My certy!--Na, I thank ye!"

"Weel, my bonny leddy," said Peter, "gien I had a prence to my
son,--providit he was worth yer takin--I wad say to ye, 'Hae, my
leddy!'"

"And I would say to you, sir, 'No--gien he bena willin,'" answered Isy,
and ran from the room.

"Weel, what think ye o' the lass by this time, Mr. Bletherwick?" said
the soutar, with a flash in his eye.

"I think jist what I thoucht afore," answered Peter: "she's ane amo' a
million!"

"I'm no that sure aboot the proportion!" returned MacLear. "I doobt ye
micht come upo twa afore ye wan throw the million!--A million's a heap
o' women!"

"All I care to say is, that gien Jeemie binna ready to lea' father and
mother and kirk and steeple, and cleave to that wuman and her only, he's
no a mere gomeril, but jist a meeserable, wickit fule! and I s' never
speyk word til 'im again, wi my wull, gien I live to the age o' auld
Methuselah!"

"Tak tent what ye say, or mint at sayin, to persuaud him:--Isy 'ill
be upo ye!" said the soutar laughing. "--But hearken to me, Mr.
Bletherwick, and sayna a word to the minister aboot the bairnie."

"Na, na; it'll be best to lat him fin' that oot for himsel.--And noo I
maun be gaein, for I hae my wallet fu'!"

He strode to the door, holding his head high, and with never a word
more, went out. The soutar closed the door and returned to his work,
saying aloud as he went, "Lord, lat me ever and aye see thy face, and
noucht mair will I desire--excep that the haill warl, O Lord, may behold
it likewise. The prayers o' the soutar are endit!"

Peter Blatherwick went home joyous at heart. His son was his son, and
no villain!--only a poor creature, as is every man until he turns to
the Lord, and leaves behind him every ambition, and all care about the
judgment of men. He rejoiced that the girl he and Marion had befriended
would be a strength to his son: she whom his wife would have rejected
had proved herself indeed right noble! And he praised the father of men,
that the very backslidings of those he loved had brought about their
repentance and uplifting.

"Here I am!" he cried as he entered the house. "I hae seen the lassie
ance mair, and she's better and bonnier nor ever!"

"Ow ay; ye're jist like a' the men I ever cam across!" rejoined Marion
smiling; "--easy taen wi' the skin-side!"

"Doobtless: the Makker has taen a heap o' pains wi the skin!--Ony gait,
yon lassie's ane amang ten thoosan! Jeemie sud be on his k-nees til her
this vera moment--no sitting there glowerin as gien his twa een war twa
bullets--fired aff, but never won oot o' their barrels!"

"Hoot! wad ye hae him gang on his k-nees til ony but the Ane!"

"Aye wad I--til ony ane that's nearer His likness nor himsel--and that
ane's oor Isy!--I wadna won'er, Jeemie, gien ye war fit for a drive the
morn! In that case, I s' caw ye doon to the toon, and lat ye say yer ain
say til her."

James did not sleep much that night, and nevertheless was greatly better
the next day--indeed almost well.

Before noon they were at the soutar's door. The soutar opened it
himself, and took the minister straight to the ben-end of the house,
where Isy sat alone. She rose, and with downcast eyes went to meet him.

"Isy," he faltered, "can ye forgie me? And wull ye merry me as sene's
ever we can be cried?--I'm as ashamed o' mysel as even ye would hae me!"

"Ye haena sae muckle to be ashamet o' as _I_ hae, sir: it was a' my
wyte!"

"And syne no to haud my face til't!--Isy, I hae been a scoonrel til ye!
I'm that disgustit at mysel 'at I canna luik ye i' the face!"

"Ye didna ken whaur I was! I ran awa that naebody micht ken."

"What rizzon was there for onybody to ken? I'm sure ye never tellt!"

Isy went to the door and called Maggie. James stared after her,
bewildered.

"There was this rizzon," she said, re-entering with the child, and
laying him in James's arms.

He gasped with astonishment, almost consternation.

"Is this mine?" he stammered.

"Yours and mine, sir," she replied. "Wasna God a heap better til me nor
I deserved?--Sic a bonnie bairn! No a mark, no a spot upon him frae heid
to fut to tell that he had no business to be here!--Gie the bonnie wee
man a kiss, Mr. Blatherwick. Haud him close to ye, sir, and he'll tak
the pain oot o' yer heart: aften has he taen 't oot o' mine--only it
aye cam again!--He's yer ain son, sir! He cam to me bringin the Lord's
forgiveness, lang or ever I had the hert to speir for 't. Eh, but we
maun dee oor best to mak up til God's bairn for the wrang we did him
afore he was born! But he'll be like his great Father, and forgie us
baith!"

As soon as Maggie had given the child to his mother, she went to her
father, and sat down beside him, crying softly. He turned on his leather
stool, and looked at her.

"Canna ye rejice wi' them that rejice, noo that ye hae nane to greit
wi', Maggie, my doo?" he said. "Ye haena lost ane, and ye hae gaint twa!
Haudna the glaidness back that's sae fain to come to the licht i' yer
grudgin hert, Maggie! God himsel 's glaid, and the Shepherd's glaid, and
the angels are a' makin sic a flut-flutter wi' their muckle wings 'at I
can 'maist see nor hear for them!"

Maggie rose, and stood a moment wiping her eyes. The same instant the
door opened, and James entered with the little one in his arms. He laid
him with a smile in Maggie's.

"Thank you, sir!" said the girl humbly, and clasped the child to her
bosom; nor, after that, was ever a cloud of jealousy to be seen on her
face. I will not say she never longed or even wept after the little one,
whom she still regarded as her very own, even when he was long gone
away with his father and mother; indeed she mourned for him then like
a mother from whom death has taken away her first-born and only son;
neither did she see much difference between the two forms of loss; for
Maggie felt in her heart that life nor death could destroy the relation
that already existed between them: she could not be her father's
daughter and not understand that! Therefore, like a bereaved mother, she
only gave herself the more to her father.

I will not dwell on the delight of James and Isobel, thus restored to
each other, the one from a sea of sadness, the other from a gulf of
perdition. The one had deserved many stripes, the other but a few:
needful measure had been measured to each; and repentance had brought
them together.

Before James left the house, the soutar took him aside, and said--

"Daur I offer ye a word o' advice, sir?"

"'Deed that ye may!" answered the young man with humility: "and I dinna
see hoo it can be possible for me to hand frae deein as ye tell me; for
you and my father and Isy atween ye, hae jist saved my vera sowl!"

"Weel, what I wad beg o' ye is, that ye tak no further step o' ony
consequence, afore ye see Maister Robertson, and mak him acquant wi the
haill affair."

"I'm vera willin," answered James; "and I doobtna Isy 'ill be content."

"Ye may be vera certain, sir, that she'll be naething but pleased: she
has a gran' opingon, and weel she may, o' Maister Robertson. Ye see,
sir, I want ye to put yersels i' the han's o' a man that kens ye baith,
and the half o' yer story a'ready--ane, that is, wha'll jeedge ye truly
and mercifully, and no condemn ye affhan'. Syne tak his advice what ye
oucht to dee neist."

"I will--and thank you, Mr. MacLear! Ae thing only I houp--that naither
you, sir, nor he will ever seek to pursuaud me to gang on preachin. Ae
thing I'm set upon, and that is, to deliver my sowl frae hypocrisy, and
walk softly a' the rest o' my days! Happy man wad I hae been, had they
set me frae the first to caw the pleuch, and cut the corn, and gether
the stooks intil the barn--i'stead o' creepin intil a leaky boat to fish
for men wi' a foul and tangled net! I'm affrontit and jist scunnert
at mysel!--Eh, the presumption o' the thing! But I hae been weel and
richteously punished! The Father drew his han' oot o' mine, and loot me
try to gang my lane; sae doon I cam, for I was fit for naething but to
fa': naething less could hae broucht me to mysel--and it took a lang
time! I houp Mr. Robertson will see the thing as I dee mysel!--Wull I
write and speir him oot to Stanecross to advise wi my father aboot Isy?
That would bring him! There never was man readier to help!--But it's
surely my pairt to gang to _him_, and mak my confession, and boo til his
judgment!--Only I maun tell Isy first!"

Isy was not only willing, but eager that Mr. and Mrs. Robertson should
know everything.

"But be sure," she added, "that you let them know you come of yourself,
and I never asked you."

Peter said he could not let him go alone, but must himself go with him,
for he was but weakly yet--and they must not put it off a single day,
lest anything should transpire and be misrepresented.

The news which father and son carried them, filled the Robertsons with
more than pleasure; and if their reception of him made James feel
the repentant prodigal he was, it was by its heartiness, and their
jubilation over Isy.

The next Sunday, Mr. Robertson preached in James's pulpit, and published
the banns of marriage between James Blatherwick and Isobel Rose. The
two following Sundays he repeated his visit to Tiltowie for the same
purpose; and on the Monday married them at Stonecross. Then was also the
little one baptized, by the name of Peter, in his father's arms--amid
much gladness, not unmingled with shame. The soutar and his Maggie were
the only friends present besides the Robertsons.

Before the gathering broke up, the farmer put the big Bible in the hands
of the soutar, with the request that he would lead their prayers; and
this was very nearly what he said:--"O God, to whom we belang, hert and
soul, body and blude and banes, hoo great art thou, and hoo close to us,
to hand the richt ower us o' sic a gran' and fair, sic a just and true
ownership! We bless thee hertily, rejicin in what thoo hast made us,
and still mair in what thoo art thysel! Tak to thy hert, and hand them
there, these thy twa repentant sinners, and thy ain little ane and
theirs, wha's innocent as thoo hast made him. Gie them sic grace to
bring him up, that he be nane the waur for the wrang they did him afore
he was born; and lat the knowledge o' his parents' faut haud him safe
frae onything siclike! and may they baith be the better for their fa',
and live a heap the mair to the glory o' their Father by cause o' that
slip! And gien ever the minister should again preach thy word, may it be
wi' the better comprehension, and the mair fervour; and to that en'
gie him to un'erstan' the hicht and deepth and breid and len'th o' thy
forgivin love. Thy name be gloryfeed! Amen!"

"Na, na, I'll never preach again!" whispered James to the soutar, as
they rose from their knees.

"I winna be a'thegither sure o' that!" returned the soutar. "Doobtless
ye'll dee as the Spirit shaws ye!"

James made no answer, and neither spoke again that night.

The next morning, James sent to the clerk of the synod his resignation
of his parish and office.

No sooner had Marion, repentant under her husband's terrible rebuke,
set herself to resist her rampant pride, than the indwelling goodness
swelled up in her like a reviving spring, and she began to be herself
again, her old and lovely self. Little Peter, with his beauty and
his winsome ways, melted and scattered the last lingering rack of her
fog-like ambition for her son. Twenty times in a morning would she drop
her work to catch up and caress her grandchild, overwhelming him with
endearments; while over the return of his mother, her second Isy, now
her daughter indeed, she soon became jubilant.

From the first publication of the banns, she had begun cleaning and
setting to rights the parlour, meaning to make it over entirely to
Isy and James; but the moment Isy discovered her intent, she protested
obstinately: it should not, could not, must not be! The very morning
after the wedding she was down in the kitchen, and had put the water on
the fire for the porridge before her husband was awake. Before her new
mother was down, or her father-in-law come in from his last preparations
for the harvest, it was already boiling, and the table laid for
breakfast.

"I ken weel," she said to her mother, "that I hae no richt to contre ye;
but ye was glaid o' my help whan first I cam to be yer servan-lass; and
what for shouldna things be jist the same noo? I ken a' the w'ys o' the
place, and that they'll lea' me plenty o' time for the bairnie: ye maun
jist lat me step again intil my ain auld place! and gien onybody comes,
it winna tak me a minute to mak mysel tidy as becomes the minister's
wife!--Only he says that's to be a' ower noo, and there'll be no need!"

With that she broke into a little song, and went on with her work,
singing.

At breakfast, James made request to his father that he might turn a
certain unused loft into a room for Isy and himself and little Peter.
His father making no objection, he set about the scheme at once, but was
interrupted by the speedy advent of an exceptionally plentiful harvest.

The very day the cutting of the oats began, James appeared on the field
with the other scythe-men, prepared to do his best. When his father
came, however, he interfered, and compelled him to take the thing
easier, because, unfit by habit and recent illness, it would be even
dangerous for him to emulate the others. But what delighted his father
even more than his good-will, was the way he talked with the men and
women in the field: every show of superiority had vanished from his
bearing and speech, and he was simply himself, behaving like the others,
only with greater courtesy.

When the hour for the noonday meal arrived, Isy appeared with her
mother-in-law and old Eppie, carrying their food for the labourers,
and leading little Peter in her hand. For a while the whole company was
enlivened by the child's merriment; after which he was laid with his
bottle in the shadow of an overarching stook, and went to sleep, his
mother watching him, while she took her first lesson in gathering and
binding the sheaves. When he woke, his grandfather sent the whole family
home for the rest of the day.

"Hoots, Isy, my dauty," he said, when she would fain have continued her
work, "wad ye mak a slave-driver o' me, and bring disgrace upo the name
o' father?"

Then at once she obeyed, and went with her husband, both of them tired
indeed, but happier than ever in their lives before.




CHAPTER XXVI


The next morning James was in the field with the rest long before the
sun was up. Day by day he grew stronger in mind and in body, until at
length he was not only quite equal to the harvest-work, but capable of
anything required of a farm servant.

His deliverance from the slavery of Sunday prayers and sermons, and his
consequent sense of freedom and its delight, greatly favoured his growth
in health and strength. Before the winter came, however, he had begun
to find his heart turning toward the pulpit with a waking desire after
utterance. For, almost as soon as his day's work ceased to exhaust him,
he had begun to take up the study of the sayings and doings of the
Lord of men, full of eagerness to verify the relation in which he stood
toward him, and, through him, toward that eternal atmosphere in which he
lived and moved and had his being, God himself.

One day, with a sudden questioning hunger, he rose in haste from his
knees, and turned almost trembling to his Greek Testament, to find
whether the words of the Master, "If any man will do the will of the
Father," meant "If any man _is willing_ to do the will of the Father;"
and finding that just what they did mean, he was thenceforward so far at
rest as to go on asking and hoping; nor was it then long before he began
to feel he had something worth telling, and must tell it to any that
would hear. And heartily he betook himself to pray for that spirit of
truth which the Lord had promised to them that asked it of their Father
in heaven.

He talked with his wife about what he had found; he talked with his
father about it; he went to the soutar, and talked with him about it.

Now the soutar had for many years made a certain use of his Sundays,
by which he now saw he might be of service to James: he went four miles
into the country to a farm on the other side of Stonecross, to hold
there a Sunday-school. It was the last farm for a long way in that
direction: beyond it lay an unproductive region, consisting mostly of
peat-mosses, and lone barren hills--where the waters above the firmament
were but imperfectly divided from the waters below the firmament.
For there roots of the hills coming rather close together, the waters
gathered and made marshy places, with here and there a patch of ground
on which crops could be raised. There were, however, many more houses,
such as they were, than could have been expected from the appearance
of the district. In one spot, indeed, not far from the farm I have
mentioned, there was a small, thin hamlet. A long way from church or
parish-school, and without any, nearer than several miles, to minister
to the spiritual wants of the people, it was a rather rough and ignorant
place, with a good many superstitions--none of them in their nature
specially mischievous, except indeed as they blurred the idea of divine
care and government--just the country for bogill-baes and brownie-baes,
boodies and water-kelpies to linger and disport themselves, long after
they had elsewhere disappeared!

When, therefore, the late minister came seeking his counsel, the soutar
proposed, without giving any special reason for it, that he should
accompany him the next Sunday afternoon, to his school at Bogiescratt;
and James consenting, the soutar undertook to call for him at Stonecross
on his way.

"Mr. MacLear," said James, as they walked along the rough parish road
together, "I have but just arrived at a point I ought to have reached
before even entertaining a thought of opening my mouth upon anything
belonging to religion. Perhaps I knew some little things _about_
religion; certainly I knew nothing _of_ religion; least of all had I
made any discovery for myself _in_ religion; and before that, how can a
man understand or know anything whatever concerning it? Even now I may
be presuming, but now at last, if I may dare to say so, I do seem to
have begun to recognize something of the relation between a man and the
God who made him; and with the sense of that, as I ventured to hint
when I saw you last Friday, there has risen in my mind a desire to
communicate to my fellow-men something of what I have seen and learned.
One thing I dare to hope--that, at the first temptation to show-off, I
shall be made aware of my danger, and have the grace given me to pull
up. And one thing I have resolved upon--that, if ever I preach again, I
will never again write a sermon. I know I shall make many blunders, and
do the thing very badly; but failure itself will help to save me from
conceit--will keep me, I hope, from thinking of myself at all, enabling
me to leave myself in God's hands, willing to fail if he please. Don't
you think, Mr. MacLear, we may even now look to God for what we ought to
say, as confidently as if, like the early Christians, we stood accused
before the magistrates?"

"I div that, Maister Jeames!" answered the soutar. "Hide yersel in God,
sir, and oot o' that secret place, secret and safe, speyk--and fear
naething. And never ye mint at speykin _doon_ to your congregation. Luik
them straucht i' the een, and say what at the moment ye think and feel;
and dinna hesitate to gie them the best ye hae."

"Thank you, thank you, sir! I think I understand," replied James.--"If
ever I speak again, I should like to begin in your school!"

"Ye sall--this vera nicht, gien ye like," rejoined the soutar. "I think
ye hae something e'en noo upo yer min' 'at ye would like to say to
them--but we'll see hoo ye feel aboot it efter I hae said a word to them
first!"

"When you have said what you want to say, Mr. MacLear, give me a look;
and if I _have_ anything to say, I will respond to your sign. Then you
can introduce me, saying what you will. Only dinna spare me; use me
after your judgment."

The soutar held out his hand to his disciple, and they finished their
journey in silence.

When they reached the farm-house, the small gathering was nearly
complete. It was mostly of farm-labourers; but a few of the congregation
worked in a quarry, where serpentine lay under the peat. In this
serpentine occurred veins of soapstone, occasionally of such a thickness
as to be itself the object of the quarrier: it was used in the making of
porcelain; and small quantities were in request for other purposes.

When the soutar began, James was a little shocked at first to hear him
use his mother-tongue as in his ordinary conversation; but any sense of
its unsuitableness vanished presently, and James soon began to feel
that the vernacular gave his friend additional power of expression, and
therewith of persuasion.

"My frien's, I was jist thinkin, as I cam ower the hill," he began,
"hoo we war a' made wi' differin pooers--some o' 's able to dee ae thing
best, and some anither; and that led me to remark, that it was the same
wi' the warl we live in--some pairts o' 't fit for growin aits, and some
bere, and some wheat, or pitatas; and hoo ilk varyin rig had to be
turnt til its ain best eese. We a' ken what a lot o' eeses the bonny
green-and-reid-mottlet marble can be put til; but it wadna do weel for
biggin hooses, specially gien there war mony streaks o' saipstane intil
't. Still it's no 'at the saipstane itsel's o' nae eese, for ye ken
there's a heap o' eeses it can be put til. For ae thing, the tailor taks
a bit o' 't to mark whaur he's to sen' the shears alang the claith, when
he's cuttin oot a pair o' breeks; and again they mix't up wi the clay
they tak for the finer kin's o' crockery. But upo' the ither han'
there's ae thing it's eesed for by some, 'at canna be considert a richt
eese to mak o' 't: there's ae wull tribe in America they tell me o', 'at
ait a hantle o' 't--and that's a thing I can_not_ un'erstan'; for it diz
them, they say, no guid at a', 'cep, maybe, it be jist to fill-in the
toom places i' their stammacks, puir reid craturs, and haud their ribs
ohn stucken thegither--and maybe that's jist what they ait it for! Eh,
but they maun be sair hungert afore they tak til the vera dirt! But
they're only savage fowk, I'm thinkin, 'at hae hardly begun to be men
ava!

"Noo ye see what I'm drivin' at? It's this--that things hae aye to be
put to their richt eeses! But there are guid eeses and better eeses,
and things canna _aye_ be putten to their _best_ eeses; only, whaur they
can, it's a shame to put them to ony ither but their best! Noo,
what's the best eese o' a man?--what's a man made for? The carritchis
(_catechism_) says, _To glorifee God_. And hoo is he to dee that? Jist
by deein the wull o' God. For the ae perfec' man said he was born intil
the warl for that ae special purpose, to dee the wull o' him that sent
him. A man's for a heap o' eeses, but that ae eese covers them a'. Whan
he's deein' the wull o' God, he's deein jist a'thing.

"Still there are vahrious wy's in which a man can be deein the wull o'
his Father in h'aven, and the great thing for ilk ane is to fin' oot the
best w'y _he_ can set aboot deein that wull.

"Noo here's a man sittin aside me that I maun help set to the best eese
he's fit for--and that is, tellin ither fowk what he kens aboot the God
that made him and them, and stirrin o' them up to dee what He would hae
them dee. The fac is, that the man was ance a minister o' the Kirk o'
Scotlan'; but whan he was a yoong man, he fell intil a great faut:--a
yoong man's faut--I'm no gaein to excuse 't--dinna think it!--Only I
chairge ye, be ceevil til him i' yer vera thouchts, rememberin hoo mony
things ye hae dene yersels 'at ye hae to be ashamit o', though some
o' them may never hae come to the licht; for, be sure o' this, he has
repentit richt sair. Like the prodigal, he grew that ashamit o' what he
had dene, that he gied up his kirk, and gaed hame to the day's darg
upon his father's ferm. And that's what he's at the noo, thof he be a
scholar, and that a ripe ane! And by his repentance he's learnt a heap
that he didna ken afore, and that he couldna hae learnt ony ither
w'y than by turnin wi' shame frae the path o' the transgressor. I hae
broucht him wi' me this day, sirs, to tell ye something--he hasna said
to me what--that the Lord in his mercy has tellt him. I'll say nae mair:
Mr. Bletherwick, wull ye please tell's what the Lord has putten it intil
yer min' to say?"

The soutar sat down; and James got up, white and trembling. For a moment
or two he was unable to speak, but overcoming his emotion, and falling
at once into the old Scots tongue, he said--

"My frien's, I hae little richt to stan' up afore ye and say onything;
for, as some o' ye ken, if no afore, at least noo, frae what my frien'
the soutar has jist been tellin ye, I was ance a minister o' the kirk,
but upon a time I behavet mysel that ill, that, whan I cam to my senses,
I saw it my duty to withdraw, and mak room for anither to tak up my
disgracet bishopric, as was said o' Judas the traitor. But noo I seem
to hae gotten some mair licht, and to ken some things I didna ken afore;
sae, turnin my back upo' my past sin, and believin God has forgien me,
and is willin I sud set my han' to his pleuch ance mair, I hae thoucht
to mak a new beginnin here in a quaiet heumble fashion, tellin ye
something o' what I hae begoud, i' the mercy o' God, to un'erstan' a
wee for mysel. Sae noo, gien yell turn, them o' ye that has broucht
yer buiks wi' ye, to the saeventh chapter o' John's gospel, and the
saeventeenth verse, ye'll read wi me what the Lord says there to the
fowk o Jerus'lem: _Gien ony man be wullin to dee His wull, he'll ken
whether what I tell him comes frae God, or whether I say 't only oot
o' my ain heid_. Luik at it for yersels, for that's what it says i' the
Greek, the whilk is plainer than the English to them that un'erstan'
the auld Greek tongue: Gien onybody _be wullin_ to dee the wull o' God,
he'll ken whether my teachin comes frae God, or I say 't o' mysel."

From that he went on to tell them that, if they kept trusting in God,
and doing what Jesus told them, any mistake they made would but help
them the better to understand what God and his son would have them do.
The Lord gave them no promise, he said, of knowing what this or that man
ought to do; but only of knowing what the man himself ought to do. And
he illustrated this by the rebuke the Lord gave Peter when, leaving
inquiry into the will of God that he might do it, he made inquiry into
the decree of God concerning his friend that he might know it; seeking
wherewithal, not to prophesy, but to foretell. Then he showed them the
difference between the meaning of the Greek word, and that of the modern
English word _prophesy_.

The little congregation seemed to hang upon his words, and as they were
going away, thanked him heartily for thus talking to them.

That same night as James and the soutar were going home together, they
were overtaken by an early snowstorm, and losing their way, were in the
danger, not a small one, of having to pass the night on the moor. But
happily, the farmer's wife, in whose house was their customary assembly,
had, as they were taking their leave, made the soutar a present of some
onion bulbs, of a sort for which her garden was famous: exhausted in
conflict with the freezing blast, they had lain down, apparently to die
before the morning, when the soutar bethought himself of the onions;
and obeying their nearer necessity, they ate instead of keeping them to
plant; with the result that they were so refreshed, and so heartened for
battle with the wind and snow, that at last, in the small hours of the
morning, they reached home, weary and nigh frozen.

All through the winter, James accompanied the soutar to his
Sunday-school, sometimes on his father's old gig-horse, but oftener
on foot. His father would occasionally go also; and then the men of
Stonecross began to go, with the cottar and his wife; so that the little
company of them gradually increased to about thirty men and women, and
about half as many children. In general, the soutar gave a short
opening address; but he always made "the minister" speak; and thus James
Blatherwick, while encountering many hidden experiences, went through
his apprenticeship to extempore preaching; and, hardly knowing how, grew
capable at length of following out a train of thought in his own mind
even while he spoke, and that all the surer from the fact that, as it
rose, it found immediate utterance; and at the same time it was rendered
the more living and potent by the sight of the eager faces of his humble
friends fixed upon him, as they drank in, sometimes even anticipated,
the things he was saying. He seemed to himself at times almost to see
their thoughts taking reality and form to accompany him whither he
led them; while the stream of his thought, as it disappeared from his
consciousness and memory, seemed to settle in the minds of those who
heard him, like seed cast on open soil--some of it, at least, to grow
up in resolves, and bring forth fruit. And all the road as the friends
returned, now in moonlight, now in darkness and rain, sometimes in wind
and snow, they had such things to think of and talk about, that the
way never seemed long. Thus dwindled by degrees Blatherwick's
self-reflection and self-seeking, and, growing divinely conscious,
he grew at the same time divinely self-oblivious. Once, upon such a
home-coming, as his wife was helping him off with his wet boots, he
looked up in her face and said--

"To think, Isy, that here am I, a dull, selfish creature, so long
desiring only for myself knowledge and influence, now at last grown able
to feel in my heart all the way home, that I took every step, one after
the other, only by the strength of God in me, caring for me as my own
making father!--Ken ye what I'm trying to say, Isy, my dear?"

"I canna be a'thegither certain I un'erstan'," answered his wife; "but
I'll keep thinkin aboot it, and maybe I'll come til't!"

"I can desire no more," answered James, "for until the Lord lat ye see
a thing, hoo can you or I or onybody see the thing that _he_ maun see
first! And what is there for us to desire, but to see things as God sees
them, and would hae us see them? I used to think the soutar a puir fule
body whan he was sayin the vera things I'm tryin to say noo! I saw nae
mair what he was efter than that puir collie there at my feet--maybe no
half sae muckle, for wha can tell what he mayna be thinkin, wi' that far
awa luik o' his!"

"Div ye think, Jeames, that ever we'll be able to see inside thae
doggies, and ken what they're thinkin?"

"I wouldna won'er what we mayna come til; for ye ken Paul says, 'A'
things are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's!' Wha can
tell but the vera herts o' the doggies may ae day lie bare and open to
_oor_ herts, as to the hert o' Him wi' whom they and we hae to do! Eh,
but the thouchts o' a doggie maun be a won'erfu' sicht! And syne to
think o' the thouchts o' Christ aboot that doggie! We'll ken them, I
daurna weel doobt, some day! I'm surer aboot that nor aboot kennin the
thouchts o' the doggie himsel!"

Another Sunday night, having come home through a terrible storm of
thunder and lightning, he said to Isy--

"I hae been feelin, a' the w'y hame, as gien, afore lang, I micht hae
to gie a wider testimony. The apostles and the first Christians, ye see,
had to beir testimony to the fac' that the man that was hangt and dee'd
upo the cross, the same was up again oot o' the grave, and gangin aboot
the warl; noo I canna beir testimony to that, for I wasna at that time
awaur o' onything; but I might weel be called upon to beir testimony to
the fac' that, whaur ance he lay deid and beeried, there he's come alive
at last--that is, i' the sepulchre o' my hert! For I hae seen him noo,
and ken him noo--the houp o' glory in my hert and my life! Whatever he
said ance, that I believe for ever."

The talks James Blatherwick and the soutar had together, were now,
according to Mr. Robertson, even wonderful. But it was chiefly the
soutar that spoke, while James sat and listened in silence. On one
occasion, however, James had spoken out freely, and indeed eloquently;
and Mr. Robertson, whom the soutar accompanied to his inn that night,
had said to him ere they parted--

"Do you see any good and cogent reason, Mr. MacLear, why this man should
not resume his pastoral office?"

"One thing at least I am sure of," answered the soutar, "--that he is
far fitter for it than ever he was in his life before."

Mr. Robertson repeated this to James the next day, adding--

"And I am certain every one who knows you will vote the restoration of
your licence!"

"I must speak to Isy about it," answered James with simplicity.

"That is quite right, of course," rejoined Mr. Robertson: "you know I
tell my wife everything that I am at liberty to tell."

"Will not some public recognition of my reinstatement be necessary?"
suggested James.

"I will have a talk about it with some of the leaders of the synod, and
let you know what they say," answered Mr. Robertson.

"Of course I am ready," returned Blatherwick, "to make any public
confession judged necessary or desirable; but that would involve my
wife; and although I know perfectly that she will be ready for anything
required of her, it remains not the less my part to do my best to shield
her!"

"Of one thing I think you may be sure--that, with our present moderator,
your case will be handled with more than delicacy--with tenderness!"

"I must not doubt it; but for myself I would deprecate indulgence. I
must have a talk with my wife about it! She is sure to know what will be
best!"

"My advice is to leave it all in the hands of the moderator. We have no
right to choose, appoint, or apportion our own penalties!"

James went home and laid the whole matter before his wife.

Instead of looking frightened, or even anxious, Isy laid little Peter
softly in his crib, threw her arms round James's neck, and cried--

"Thank God, my husband, that you have come to this! Don't think to leave
me out, I beg of you. I am more than ready to accept my shame. I have
always said _I_ was to blame, and not you! It was me that should have
known better!"

"You trusted me, and I proved quite unworthy of your confidence!--But
had ever man a wife to be so proud of as I of you!"

Mr. Robertson brought the matter carefully before the synod; but neither
James nor Isy ever heard anything more of it--except the announcement
of the cordial renewal of James's licence. This was soon followed by the
offer of a church in the poorest and most populous parish north of the
Tweed.

"See the loving power at the heart of things, Isy!" said James to his
wife: "out of evil He has brought good, the best good, and nothing
but good!--a good ripened through my sin and selfishness and ambition,
bringing upon you as well as me disgrace and suffering! The evil in me
had to come out and show itself, before it could be cleared away! Some
people nothing but an earthquake will rouse from their dead sleep: I was
one of such. God in His mercy brought on the earthquake: it woke me and
saved me from death. Ignorant creatures go about asking why God permits
evil: _we_ know why! It may be He could with a word cause evil to
cease--but would that be to create good? The word might make us good
like oxen or harmless sheep, but would that be a goodness worthy of him
who was made in the image of God? If a man ceased to be _capable_ of
evil, he must cease to be a man! What would the goodness be that could
not help being good--that had no choice in the matter, but must be such
because it was so made? God chooses to be good, else he would not be
God: man must choose to be good, else he cannot be the son of God!
Herein we see the grand love of the Father of men--that he gives them
a share, and that share as necessary as his own, in the making of
themselves! Thus, and thus only, that is, by willing the good, can they
become 'partakers of the divine nature!' Satan said, 'Ye shall be as
gods, knowing good and evil!' God says, 'Ye shall be as gods, knowing
good and evil, and choosing the good.' For the sake of this, that we may
come to choose the good, all the discipline of the world exists. God is
teaching us to know good and evil in some real degree _as they are_, and
not as _they seem to the incomplete_; so shall we learn to choose the
good and refuse the evil. He would make his children see the two things,
good and evil, in some measure as they are, and then say whether they
will be good children or not. If they fail, and choose the evil, he will
take yet harder measures with them. If at last it should prove possible
for a created being to see good and evil as they are, and choose the
evil, then, and only then, there would, I presume, be nothing left for
God but to set his foot upon him and crush him, as we crush a noxious
insect. But God is deeper in us than our own life; yea, God's life is
the very centre and creative cause of that life which we call _ours_;
therefore is the Life in us stronger than the Death, in as much as the
creating Good is stronger than the created Evil."

THE END








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Salted With Fire, by George MacDonald

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SALTED WITH FIRE ***

***** This file should be named 9154.txt or 9154.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/1/5/9154/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Debra Storr and Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

